                                  International Baccalaureate
                                      Internal Assessment
                                       Research Proposal




                              Business Management

 - Should Fighting Fit Club and British International School Istanbul re-establish

                             a concession as a growth strategy? -




                                          Candidate #

                             Research Proposal Word Count: 495

Intended Audience: CEO of Fighting Fit Club, Head of PE Department (Christian Huegel), Head of Sec-

ondary (Richard Robinson).
1     Research Proposal

1.1    Research Question

Should Fighting Fit Club and and British International School Istanbul re-establish a concession as a growth

strategy?


1.2    Rationale

Fighting Fit Club (FFC) is service business with a new facility found in Istanbul, Sarıyer. Convienitely,

its location is near British International School Istanbul (BISI). It is around 5 kilometers way, that is, a 10

minute drive. A recent survey conducted by the school suggests that parents are most unsatisfied with the

Physical Education provided by the school in comparison to other subjects (66 respondents).




    Figure 1: Survey result for the question ”Please rate the quality, pace and focus of the online lessons”
                                               (Robinson, 2020)


Evidently, maintaining a healthy lifestyle was shown to be a challenge for the vast majority (that is, stu-

dents, staff and parents) because of the strict lock downs announced by the government. Today, these re-

strictions are less strict and selective groups are being called to school physically. Moreover, given that

FFC and BISI have already established a very short concession pre-pandemic which was mainly targetted

to students, this may be shown beneficial for both businesses to see whether such a concession is possible

again, however, now taking account new specialised features such as newly offered sports, new target mar-

kets (parents and staff) and new safety measurements.




                                                       1
1.3     Questionnaire/Survey/Interview Audience and Plan

       People/Organisation                                Reason
                                                          Inflict opinion on such a possible concession.
       CEO/Employee of FFC                                Does the current research link with the objec-
                                                          tives of FFC?
                                                          His opinion on how positively and negatively
       Head of PE Department (Christian Huegel)           such a concession might affect the PE Depart-
                                                          ment, the objectives of the PE Department
                                                          Their opinion as the main customer base on an
       Students
                                                          access to a premium gym
                                                          His opinion on how such a concession would
       Head of Secondary (Richard Robinson)               affect the school’s image, whether it meets the
                                                          school’s objectives

                     Table 1: Group of people that will be interviewed and/or be surveyed



1.4     Areas of Syllabus Covered

 1.3 Organisational Objectives

 4.2 Marketing Planning

 4.4 Market Research

 4.5 4Ps - Price, Place, Product, Promotion


1.5     Primary Research

      • Interview with the CEO or an employee of Fighting Fit Club

      • Questionnaire for students from years 7-13

      • Interview with the Head of Secondary

      • Interview with the Head of PE Department


1.6     Secondary Research

      • Fighting Fit Club Website - Mission and Vision statements, objectives, sources for contacting

      • MACFit Website - Information for availability, type of sports

      • Cambridge Business Management Textbook - tools, information

                                                      2
      • British International School Website - Mission and Vision statements, objectives


1.7     Possible Difficulties

       Possible Problems                                  Possible Solutions
       The CEO of Fighting Fit Club or employee
                                                          Other factors will be considered when making
       might not disclose the information that I am
                                                          the decision
       seeking
                                                          A scheduled time is necessary through phone,
       The CEO of Fighting Fit Club or employee
                                                          email etc. to guarantee a place or a spot and
       might have a busy schedule, thus I might not
                                                          time to speak and disclose the information
       be able to interview them
                                                          required
                                                          Ask teachers to inform about the question-
       Not enough answers for the PE Questionnaire        naire and add it to the weekly bulletin to raise
                                                          awareness

                                  Table 2: Possible problems and solutions



1.8     Action plan

Unfortunately, due to COVID-19, the original plan and Gantt chart was delayed by a large amount, with

a huge break between February and October. Therefore, there are 2 Gantt charts, one for which is initial

(January-February) and the later (October-December) to show reflect upon these modifications.




                         Figure 2: (Part 1 of 2) Gantt chart from January to February




                                                      3
Figure 3: (Part 2 of 2) Gantt chart from October to December




                             4
                                  International Baccalaureate
                                      Internal Assessment
                                         Written Report




                             Business Management

 - Should Fighting Fit Club and British International School Istanbul re-establish

                             a concession as a growth strategy? -




                                          Candidate #

                             Written Report Word Count: 1996

                             Execute Summary Word Count: 199

Intended Audience: CEO of Fighting Fit Club, Head of PE Department (Christian Huegel), Head of Sec-

ondary (Richard Robinson).
1   Acknowledgments

I would like to acknowledge the following individuals and groups who have helped me writing this Internal

Assessment:

    • Michael Leaver, the Business Management teacher, for his effort, advice, and support in writing this

      Internal Assessment;

    • Richard Robinson, the head of Secondary, for his time and effort in the interview;

    • Christian Huegel, the head of Sports Department, for his time and effort in the interview;

    • The FFC employee for her time and effort in the interview;

    • Parents and students for their time and effort in answering the online questionnaire.
Contents


1   Acknowledgments


2   Written Report                                                                                             1

    2.1   Executive Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       1

    2.2   Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    1

    2.3   Research Question . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       2

    2.4   Methodology Employed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        2

    2.5   Main Results and Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       2

          2.5.1   Christian Huegel Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      2

          2.5.2   Richard Robinson Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3

          2.5.3   FFC Employee Interview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        3

          2.5.4   Questionnaire Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       3

    2.6   Analysis and Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7

          2.6.1   Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      7

          2.6.2   Product Positioning Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       7

          2.6.3   Boston Consulting Group Matrix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          8

          2.6.4   Marketing Mix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       9

                  2.6.4.1   Price . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

                  2.6.4.2   Place . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

                  2.6.4.3   Product . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

                  2.6.4.4   Promotion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

    2.7   Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10

    2.8   Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11

    2.9   Limitations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11


References                                                                                                     12


Appendices                                                                                                     13


A Christian Huegel Interview Transcript                                                                        13
B Richard Robinson Interview Transcript   16


C Interview with an FFC Employee          18


D Online Questionnaire                    22
2     Written Report

2.1   Executive Summary

The Fighting Fit Club (FFC) used to be in a concession with British International School Istanbul (BISI),

until the COVID-19 outbreak set curfews and lock downs. However, this has been seen as a possible op-

portunity that FFC can take due to the declining quality of fitness and health of individuals. This lead to

the research question ”Should Fighting Fit Club and British International School Istanbul re-establish a

concession as a growth strategy?”

Primary research was conducted using interviews with various notable employees of both businesses. An

interview was sent out to parents and students to further investigate sports interests of potential customers.

Multiple different possibilities of re-concession were taken into account: in gym during class, in school

during class or out of school clubs. To analyse and optimise the concession the 4Ps, BCG Matrix, and the

product positioning map were used.

In conclusion, both the school and FFC can benefit from each other. The FFC should re-establish a conces-

sion with the school by introducing after school clubs by prioritising Pilates, Tang Soo Do and Cross Body

fit in ranked order. Lastly, it is worth considering to introduce a new sport which can appeal to the old and

masculine market.


2.2   Introduction

Fighting Fit Club (FFC) is a newly established (2012) sole-trader sports complex business with three sports

halls located in various provinces of Turkey. The FFC Istanbul sports hall is conveniently located next to

an International school, giving various opportunities for FFC to establish concessions. Before the pan-

demic, FFC offered lessons of Tang Soo Do, Fitness and Functional Training inside the school in after

school sessions, most of which were targeted at the students, teachers and the parents of the students. How-

ever, due to the COVID-19 pandemic, lock downs and curfews were initiated which resulted in the end of

the concession between the school and FFC. On the contrary, the end of the concession may also be a be-

ginning of an opportunity: with the increasing lock downs and curfews, individual fitness and health has

become a topic of everyone’s concern. This became further evident with the results of the school’s Phys-

ical Education quality. Hence, this Internal Assessment will explore whether a re-concession would be

advantageous for both sides by confirming the organisational objectives of both businesses, and how the

FFC should ultimately be re-introduced to the school to effectively stimulate FFC’s growth and gain an


                                                      1
advantage against its competitor MACFit.


2.3        Research Question

Should Fighting Fit Club and British International School Istanbul re-establish a concession as a growth

strategy?


2.4        Methodology Employed

A total of four primary researches were conducted for this Internal Assessment. Three of these were inter-

views, one was an online questionnaire sent out to the students. The aim of the interviews was to get de-

tailed answers in regards to sustained values of the businesses, their opinion on each others’ businesses,

and opinion with regards to several possibilities of a re-concession (e.g. through integration of FFC in

PE lessons in school, or in FFC’s sports hall with their equipment, or after school). The online question-

naire was aimed to extract students’ and parents’ interest and opinion on various possible sports, individual

availability and safety concerns due to COVID-19.


2.5        Main Results and Findings

2.5.1        Christian Huegel Interview

1 The consent for the recording of the transcript was asked. Moreover, the interview was conducted be-


fore COVID-19, hence some unnecessary information for the IA such as the the ”Year 10 program” can be

found in the transcript. The main results of the interview, however, can be shortened as follows:

      • Believes that the current equipment of the school is sufficient.

      • Is happy with Fighting Fit Club’s presence, was used by some teachers and students for fitness previ-

            ously.

      • Having concessions to replace PE lessons is not financially solvable by the school.

      • However, a PE lesson concession during winter might be an opportunity because outdoor gyms can-

            not be used, meaning that they’re lacking space.




      1
          See Appendix A for the transcript


                                                          2
2.5.2    Richard Robinson Interview

2 The consent for the recording of the transcript was asked. Moreover, the interview was conducted be-


fore COVID-19, hence some unnecessary information for the IA such as the the ”Year 10 program” can be

found in the transcript. The main results of the interview, however, can be shortened as follows:

    • The director, Richard Robinson, focuses on the improvement of the PE department with continuous

        improvement.

    • The current PE department lacks space, and more PE equipment for lessons is always welcome.

    • Bringing students to the gym of FFC might be troublesome due to dangers of walking across road

        and can be costly using school bus

    • A concession would fit the objectives of the school by promoting health and fitness


2.5.3    FFC Employee Interview

3 The consent for the recording of the transcript was asked, however, the permission was denied. Hence,


summary to the questions asked were written in real time instead. The main results of the interview can be

shortened as follows:

    • FFC having concessions with other schools has been done before in Izmir.

    • The business’s mission and vision statement fits with Richard Robinson’s mission and vision state-

        ment, that is to promote health.

    • Would like to work with BISI again, has had experience with working in BISI

    • The busiest times of the business include Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, when group

        lessons are offered.


2.5.4    Questionnaire Results

The student questionnaire was created using Google Forms 4 . Because the interviews proved that having

in-school lessons with the FFC is difficult, the questionnaire aimed to see whether a concession as an after
   2
     See Appendix B for the transcript
   3
     See Appendix C for the interview summary
   4
     The questions can be found in Appendix D




                                                      3
school club for both parents and students is possible. Hence, it was aimed to see whether potential cus-

tomers would be satisfied with such a concession.

This graph shows whether the respondents would attend sports lessons with trained professionals in con-

sideration with social distancing measures in school




              Figure 1: Would the person consider sports lessons with trained professionals?


This graph shows the days at which the respondents were most comfortable in attending the lessons on.

The most popular choice was Wednesday, followed closely by Monday.




                                        Figure 2: Preference of day


This graph shows the times at which the respondents were most comfortable in attending the lessons on.

The time range of 15:00-16:30 was the most preferred. Similarly, 16:30-18:00 was the second most popu-

lar option.



                                                       4
                                        Figure 3: Preference of time


This graph shows the results of the questionnaire, for which was aimed at parents and students of the school.

In the result below, the word ”adult” is defined to be respondents who are at the age of 19+. Students were

excluded in these results due to their dependency in finance and costs, even if their results were collected.

The graph below shows that the most preferred cost range is 800 − 1000 TL.




                                 Figure 4: Adults’ preference of cost range


This graph shows the relationship between age and sports preferences listed in the questionnaire. Kickbox-

ing especially attracted younger individuals. Pilates, on the other hand, was preferred the most by older

individuals. One person was also excluded from the results as they did not want to disclose their age.



                                                      5
                                Figure 5: Age range and sports preference


This graph shows the relationship between gender and sports preferences listed in the questionnaire. Pilates

was the most liked sports by the majority, with this majority mostly being female.




                                  Figure 6: Gender and sports preference




                                                     6
2.6     Analysis and Discussion

2.6.1    Overview

Because the majority of people have chosen most popular time range to be within 15:00-16:30 and 16:30-

18:00, the following analysis will be based upon the idea of implementing a concession using the school’s

gym and the FFC’s own equipment for the private lessons as an after school club. The most safest COVID-

19 area in the school is the outdoor football field due to the natural ventilation and large area for social dis-

tancing. It can approximately hold 60 customers.


2.6.2    Product Positioning Map

We will use the product positioning in an attempt to answer why a high portion of the respondents (22.6%)

responded none, to find which audience FFC may be failing to appeal, if any.




                         Figure 7: The product positioning map from survey results


After positioning from survey results, a lack of ”masculine” and ”old” sports is evidently missing. The

introduction of a sport which can fit within the category of ”old” and ”masculine” can help gaining the

missing potential customers. Moreover, from the statistics, the large portion of respondents who responded

”None” are respondents are also mostly male and old, coinciding with our mapping. Hence we are looking

for a new sport which can theoretically fit the following:




                                                        7
                       Figure 8: The product positioning map with the ”new” sport


For which can result in a more possible successful concession between the FFC and the school, as it allows

to cover a broader market.


2.6.3   Boston Consulting Group Matrix

The BCG matrix is a tool used for businesses to help decide which products or services are worth for fur-

ther investment, allowing to plan future strategies (Stimpson & Smith, 2005, p.402). The BCG Matrix was

constructed using local knowledge, information of available sports from competitor’s website (MACFit Or-

manada, 2021) in local region, and survey results.




                                   Figure 9: BCG Matrix for the sports


                                                     8
       With pilates placed as a question mark as a result of high availability of the sport in the local MACFit gym,

       a concession with the school can ultimately increase the market share. This implies that there is potential

       for the sport to move onto the ”Star” category, potentially increasing the revenue generated.


       2.6.4     Marketing Mix

       The purpose of the marketing mix is to find the right combination P’s so FFC can gain and maintain ad-

       vantage over MACFit in the concession (Lumen, n.d.). All price calculations will be done taking the sam-

       ples from the survey of 53 respondents (9.8% response rate) and extrapolating them to a larger population.

       With the approximation of 181 secondary students and hence approximately 362 parents, there are 543

       potential customers. Through survey results, extrapolating the result in Figure 1 yields us 246 potential

       customers.


       2.6.4.1    Price


                                               Approximate amount                                          Potential Revenue
                     % of adults who are
                                                 of customers (yi )          Potential Revenue (zi )        with the limit of
    Price Range      willing to pay equal
i                                                (yi = 246 × 100
                                                              xi
                                                                 )       (zi =Mean price range ×yi )        the football field
        (TL)         range or higher (xi )
                                              (rounded to the nearest                 (TL)                 (60 people or less)
                    (3 significant figures)
                                                  whole number)                                                   (TL)
1    600-800                 100                        246                          172200                       42000
2   800-1000                 91.3                       225                          202500                       54000
3   1000-1200                39.1                        96                          105600                       66000
4   1200-1400                17.4                        43                          55900                        55900
5   1400-1600                4.35                        11                          16500                        16500


       A 3 month revenue forecast suggests that the most profitable price range that FFC should choose is 1000 −

       1200 TL, which brings in the most revenue out of all using the statistics from our survey. Hence, no pric-

       ing techniques such as pricing discrimination is required, as the range falls well within the business’s cur-

       rent prices and is optimised for the concession.


       2.6.4.2    Place

       The location of the concession is the school. That is, from results in interviews with Christian Huegel and

       Richard Robinson who have highlighted that transportation, cost etc. to the gym of FFC is inconvenient,

       hence it is appropriate to offer lessons in the school. This option is convenient for FFC since the distance

       of both businesses is minimal. The most popular time ranges coincide with the time the school finishes

       (15:30), hence it is appropriate to hold lessons after school. This is also convenient for the customers, as

                                                              9
students and parents who pick up their children are given the option to attend lessons immediately after

regular lessons. Lastly, the school is also in close proximity to MACFit Ormanada (≈ 100m) which can in

turn aid FFC to gain market share in the relative area.


2.6.4.3    Product

FFC’s branding is designed to be viewed as high quality, hence the premium price. This makes stand out in

comparison to MACFit, a generic chain of sports gyms and lessons, differentiating its services. The service

offered by FFC clearly satisfies the created demand of a healthy lifestyle as seen in Figure 1.


2.6.4.4    Promotion

The promotion of the concession is not relatively required, which can save costs. Given that the reputation

of FFC is held well within Richard Robinson and Christian Huegel, it is implied that FFC’s reputation in

school is well established among staff, which can extrapolate further into parents and students. Further-

more, promotion, although unnecessary, could be established in school at relatively no cost. This could

be advertising through in-school posters, school weekly bulletins. In fact, the survey that was shared with

students and parents is in a sense also advertisement suggesting of a possible re-concession.


2.7     Conclusion

      • A re-concession by utilising real time lessons of the school is inconvenient for the school.

      • Both businesses overlap in their mission and vision statements with positive feedback from school

        staff, and thus a re-concession is likely.

      • The concession may help the students’ and parents’ satisfaction with sports of the school, given that

        a large majority would consider attending professional lessons.

      • There is a high demand for sports due to the declining fitness of individuals as a result of the pan-

        demic, which is reflected within the surveys and is an advantage the FFC can take.

      • There is a lack of an ”old-masculine” sport which is causing a loss of potential customers and thus

        sales for the FFC.

      • Pilates is a sport which can be considerably benefited with market share due to the concession, po-

        tentially making it a star.


                                                       10
      • The price set by the FFC is appropriate and does not require any discriminatory pricing specific for

        the concession.


2.8     Recommendation

      • The FFC should look into having a concession with the school to take advantage of the COVID-19

        pandemic. Both businesses can ultimately prove useful for each other.

      • This concession should not consist of offering alternative PE lessons to students during classes

      • This concession instead should consist of lessons offered after school, and should mainly focus on

        Pilates, Tang Soo Do and Cross Body Fit.

      • The FFC should not change the price of their products

      • The FFC should should introduce a sport which can appeal to the old and masculine market


2.9     Limitations

      • The total amount of respondents for the survey was low (53). More responses would yield to more

        accurate results.

      • It is possible that the audience which answered the questionnaire are more enthusiastic about sports

        as a result of selective bias when choosing to answer. Hence, the uninterested population may be

        underrepresented.

      • The statistical market share of FFC and its competitors is not known, hence judgment was used us-

        ing local knowledge. Having statistical data of the market share would help for more accurate analy-

        sis.




                                                      11
References

Guiding Statements [Online]. (n.d.). Retrieved 2021-2-21, from https://www.bis.k12.tr/guiding

     -statements

Lumen. (n.d.). Marketing Mix [Online]. Retrieved 2021-3-5, from https://courses.lumenlearning

     .com/wmopen-introbusiness/chapter/marketing-mix-introduction/

MACFit Ormanada [Online]. (2021). Retrieved 2021-2-21, from https://www.macfit.com.tr/

     kulupler/macfit-ormanada

Robinson, R.   (2020).   Online Education Survey Secondary [Survey].   Retrieved 2020-11-23,

     from https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/15sIF1qXPcoqkiwDIwKfZiYHDGJH8

     -mXbVR4owPnfOHE/edit#slide=id.g9cc521e485 0 563

Stimpson, P., & Smith, A. (2005). Business Management for the IB Diploma [Book]. Cambridge Univer-

     sity Press.




                                                 12
Appendices

A     Christian Huegel Interview Transcript

Student: Hello Mr Huegel. I would first like to start by saying that I will be recording this interview in or-

der to create a transcript in the end for my IA. Thus I am asking for your consent and permission to record.

Is it okay with you?

Student: Do you believe that the current PE equipment provided by the school is adequate?

Christian Huegel: I think generally our PE department is generally good resourced. I think we have good

resources. We have a lot of resources. Just recently we were getting a couple of sports academy people

coming in such as basketball, handball and judo, and they have got some new resources as well. The money

supplied for tear and wear stuff is okay, we definitely though need a new gym with the growing numbers of

students.

Student: Okay, that is pretty interesting. What are some of the equipment you wish that the school had for

PE lessons?

Christian Huegel: Yes, we have growing numbers now with the introduction of the national school, and

in the winter now we have a scenario where for example the year 1s come into the gym and they are 49

students, and 49 students in that gym is what I would say is the limit, so we do split them to the small gym

up here, where we can put 10, keep 40 down here. The other thing we definitely wanna have is the non-

swimmer pool. We only have a pool which is deep, so for beginners it is not so suitable. One more thing

we are desperate for is the basketball court upgraded. It could do with a roof, even if it doesn’t have a roof

the surface is so bad that nobody actually wants to use it.

Student: Right, it is made out of cement

Christian Huegel: Yeah, even the concrete isn’t so bad but such a rough concrete, if you fall down you cut

your skin open to the bones, and the solution is very cheap.

Student: So it is generally just unsafe

Christian Huegel: Yes

Student: Do you believe that lack of equipment limits the potential of students or even teachers?

Christian Huegel: I don’t think the lack is due to the equipment we have, I think the lack is due to the amount

of sports we offer. We have a maximum of 2 PE sessions in a week and year 10s along with 11s have a sin-

gle session per week, whilst year 12s don’t even have a PE session. I think it is a crucial and an important

subject, we all have to live with our bodies for the rest of our lives and so I think creating an interest for

                                                       13
sports and being life time active is one of the most important things we can offer as a school.

Student: Have you heard about the Fighting Fit Club?

Christian Huegel: I have heard about it, and I do know it. Yes.

Student: If so, have you ever gone there and have an opinion on it?

Christian Huegel: I have been there several times, I have 2 daughters both of them that attend the Tang Soo

Do classes. A lot of our students in fact take part in these classes, a lot of children are very happy with it.

I can’t really make a professional opinion about it, however, it seems that they are doing a very good job.

I’ve only seen a few lessons. I also know that some of our teachers use the gym, and the facilities for me

look good. We even took students there for a fitness course.

Student: What if Fighting Fit Club and the school established a concession in which during some, if not

most PE lessons permanently (long-term), or at least temporarily (short-term) had an option of going to

Fighting Fit Club for equipment and possibly lessons?

Christian Huegel: Yes, this is actually something we have started 2 years ago, however, it requires finan-

cial interest and is difficult to pay for everybody to go there. We do this for year 10s already, generally we

would appreciate it if there was more involvement with them. How this is going to be financially reason-

able or solvable I do not know.

Student: If such a concession was established, how would this affect you and the PE department in gen-

eral?

Christian Huegel: Generally speaking, we would be doing our PE lessons in a nicer and a more profes-

sional environment. I do not think that our school should take over our PE lessons, this is a very big topic

and lots of ifs what’s when its going to happen. We as a PE department would be in favour of something

like this, however. To add, I do not think that such a program could be established for longer than a few

months per year because of the program that we offer. During the winter months, it would be brilliant. But

for the whole year, it is not a suitable solution.

Student: How would this concession affect the motivation of the teachers?

Christian Huegel: I only think this is possible to do for a half-term, especially during January - February

period with the ski trips, possibly until the Easter break. I don’t think it would affect the workload that they

would do.

Student: Do you think the better equipment would specifically motivate the teachers?

Christian Huegel: I personally believe that the teachers are already pretty motivated. Teachers volunteer

to spend their weekends, extra time etc. for work. Generally, what we currently have as the PE department



                                                       14
and me as the PE head department I believe that everyone’s currently quite motivated, although bringing in

new stuff and ideas will possibly excite and possibly make it more interesting for them, instead of staying

locked up in the same gym for 6 months, so such a change would obviously be a positive thing.

Student: Is there anything else that you would like to add?

Christian Huegel: The biggest issue we currently have right now is the facility and space during the winter

as the national school was introduced recently. For the amount of teachers I believe we’re okay. We have 3

PE teachers, scheduled for every lesson spread amongst 50 kids, which is around 16 for each teacher which

is a very generous amount, however, having 50 students in a single gym is just too much. Having a swim-

ming pool and not being allowed to use it because it is not ‘safe’ and I think we’re the only PE department

in the world which is not allowed to teach swimming. We have a policy which states that if a child is a non-

swimmer, and since we don’t have a beginner’s swimming pool, we’re not allowed to teach them at all.




                                                     15
B    Richard Robinson Interview Transcript

Student: Hello Mr Robinson. I would first like to start by saying that I will be recording this interview

in order to create a transcript in the end for my IA. Thus I am asking for your consent and permission to

record. Is it okay with you?

Richard Robinson: Yes.

Student: Okay, for the first question, what are your future plans for the PE department?

Richard Robinson: Well, as with all departments, the plan is that there will be continuous improvement of

the department’s quality.

Student: Do you believe that the current equipment is adequate?

Richard Robinson: It is adequate for some of the sports, but not for others, specifically the ones we do not

offer. As everything, it could be improved.

Student: What are some of the equipment you wish that the PE department had?

Richard Robinson: I think it would be nice to have some proper gym equipment, however, we also need

proper space for it which we lack.

Student: Like dumb bells for examples?

Richard Robinson: Yeah, like dumb bells and multi gym things. . .

Student: Do you believe that lack of equipment like these limits the potential of students and/or teachers?

Richard Robinson: I do not think it limits the potential, however, obviously having more equipment would

be more beneficial.

Student: So would you like more equipment overall in PE?

Richard Robinson: Yep, having a higher range of equipment is obviously better just like any other educa-

tional department in our school.

Student: Have you heard of the Fighting Fit Club, and what do you think about it?

Richard Robinson: Yes, I’ve heard of it, I can see it from the class room window. I do not have an opinion

on it, and I’ve never been there.

Student: If the FFC and the BISI established a concession, in which during some, if not most the PE lessons

had an option going to FFC during lessons, or even vice versa, what would your opinion be on this?

Richard Robinson: This is already happening to an extent, we have this happening with the Year 10s. As

well as some of the Friday activities

Student: So if there was a better concession established which included most of secondary during winter



                                                      16
for FFC, what would your opinion be on this?

Richard Robinson: Well as I said, the more options there are the better, the only issue with Fighting Fit

Club that I see is that you have to cross the road which can be somewhat dangerous

Student: And if such a concession was to establish how would it affect you as the future Secondary Direc-

tor?

Richard Robinson: I think the only issue we would have is the time tabling, if FFC can only take us during

certain times then we will have to adapt and play around with the time table in the future.

Student: Would such a program align with the objectives of the school? Richard Robinson: Yes, definitely.

If you read through the guiding statements, this is exactly the type of thing that we should be doing. To

promote health, fitness etc.

Student: Okay, thank you. That was all I needed.




                                                     17
C     Interview with an FFC Employee

Please note that this interview was not recorded using a voice recorder unlike the others due to the com-

fort of the employee. However, the most crucial questions and answers were written instead in real time.

Moreover, the questions and answers for the purpose of this IA were translated to English.

Student: Do you have a catalogue I could see?

Employee:Yes, here it is.

(The catalogue was scanned and attached into the pages below)

Student: How long is the business open for?

Employee: The business was established 8 years ago.

Student: Have you attempted to offer lessons in other establishments other than BISI?

Employee:Non other than the school in Istanbul, however, in Izmir there is currently one concession hap-

pening with another business.

Student: What is the business’s mission and vision statement?

Employee: To offer cultural background and sports discipline to the customers, whilst promoting a healthy

lifestyle.

Student: What kind of physical activities did you offer in BISI before? Employee: Tang Soo Do, Fitness

and Functional Training

Student: Would you like to work with BISI again?

Employee: Yes, certainly

Student: When are the busiest times?

Employee: The busiest times follow to be the times at which we offer grouped lessons, that is, more specif-

ically, during Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays.

At the end of the interview, phone number and email was exchanged with the employee if needed of further

contact.




                                                    18
19
20
21
D     Online Questionnaire

I am a...

    1. Student

    2. Parent

    3. Staff

I am a...

    1. Male

    2. Female

I am ... years old

    1. 10-18

    2. 19-34

    3. 35-49

    4. 50-64

    5. 65+

    6. Prefer not to say

With the declining fitness of individuals due to the ongoing pandemic, would you consider coming to

school with social distancing measures to do sports with trained professionals?

    1. Yes

    2. No

    3. Not sure

From these choice of sports, I would be interested in seeing the following

    1. Tang Soo Do

    2. Cross Body Fit

                                                    22
   3. Pilates

   4. Cardio Kickboxing

   5. None

However, out of the options available, I am especially interested in

   1. Tang Soo Do

   2. Cross Body Fit

   3. Pilates

   4. Cardio Kickboxing

   5. None

Which of the following week days would you find suitable for sports lessons in school?

   1. Monday

   2. Tuesday

   3. Wednesday

   4. Thursday

   5. Friday

   6. Saturday

   7. Sunday

Between which hours would be most suitable for you?

   1. 9:00-10:30

   2. 10:30-12:00

   3. 12:00-13:30

   4. 13:30-15:00

   5. 15:00-16:30

                                                     23
   6. 16:30-18:00

   7. 18:00-19:30

   8. 19:30-21:00

Which pricing would you find suitable for your most interested sport? (Consider this price to be a recursive

price for 3 months, otherwise, if chosen Pilates, please consider 10 hour worth of lessons instead)

   1. 600-800 TL

   2. 800-1000 TL

   3. 1000-1200 TL

   4. 1200-1400 TL

   5. 1400-1600 TL




                                                     24
