Link to the article: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-49764964
This article talks about how India has implemented an expansionary fiscal policy by cutting the
corporate tax rate from 30% to 22% “in an effort to spur investment and boost growth in the
country’s faltering economy.”

“Expansionary fiscal policy is a policy involving the increase of government spending and/or the
reduction of taxation”1. In this case, India has cut the corporate tax rate which “is a levy placed on a
firm's profit by the government2”. When this tax rate is cut, the profit margin of companies
increases, and therefore there is an incentive to invest in the company, because return on investment
has increased. Increase in investment would then lead to an increase in India’s real GDP (Figure 1).




                                                                                                                     Figure 1

Since there is an increase in investment, which is a component of aggregate demand, the aggregate
demand curve shifts right (increases) from AD0 to AD1. There is a movement alongside the LRAS
curve and the equilibrium point shifts from (Y0;P0) to (Y1;P1), where Y1>Y0, which means that due
to cut corporate tax rates India’s real GDP has increased and India has moved closer to its potential
output level, in that way improving efficiency. Increase in aggregate demand also leads to lower
unemployment, because to increase aggregate demand (and produce a higher GDP) more resources
are needed, those including labour resources. Also, as a result of the AD increase inflation arises —
there is an increase in price level from P0 to P1.

1
  Finamore, David. ”Fiscal policy: The role of fiscal policy” in Economics: Supporting Every Learner across the IB Continuum, edited by Christian
Bryan, page 178. Harlow, Essex: Pearson Education Limited, 2014.
2
    Kagan, Julia. “Corporate Tax.” Investopedia. Investopedia, January 29, 2020. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/corporatetax.asp
Firms benefit from this tax cut, because they have to pay less money in taxes to the government,
therefore their post-tax profit increases. Due to this firms invest more, hire new workers and
therefore Indian households also clearly benefit as their household income increases.

Since firms now are more eager to invest, some of the investment could go to research and
development. This would improve the current technology, thus either improving productivity or
increasing the quality of the products, which, in both cases, would lead to economic growth and
outward shift of LRAS.

Additionally, bigger return on investment, could allow the firms to reduce the price of their
products, thus increasing their international competitiveness, which could prove to be crucial to
increase economic stability as currently “The country has relied on domestic consumption to fuel
growth”.

Comparing this policy with its counterpart, expansionary monetary policy, which is “expansion of
the money supply and a decrease in interest rates to encourage consumption, investment and
economic growth”3, this policy seems more effective, as “So far this year, India's central bank has
cut rates four times and the benchmark rate currently sits at a near-decade low.”, which shows,
that cutting interest rates seems to not be working and that fiscal policy is working better in this
situation.

However, there are also downsides to this policy. A loser in this situation is India’s government, as
now they receive less revenue from firms paying the tax. This reduces their ability to spend money
on public goods, such as education and transport.

Additional downside to this policy is that it only affects supply-side, it does not deal with the
demand-side of the market. Since “spending has slowed sharply”, it is possible to argue, that even
with lower taxes firms will not start investing more, but rather will just keep the extra profit,
because of insufficient demand for their product. Thus it can be argued that expansionary fiscal
policy in the form of government spending would work better, because it would directly affect the
demand side of the market and would also improve the public sector, however, it is of concern that
from too much government spending the crowding out effect would take place, that is, government
borrowing would rise the real interest rate, which would then decrease investment — the exact
opposite of what the Indian government is trying to achieve.




3
  Finamore, David. ”Monetary policy: The role of monetary policy” in Economics: Supporting Every Learner across the IB Continuum, edited by
Christian Bryan, page 183. Harlow, Essex: Pearson Education Limited, 2014.
To conclude, cutting corporate tax rates would cause increased profits for firms and improve the life
of workers and households, as unemployment would become lower and wages would increase.
Additionally, it seems that fiscal policy is the correct move from India’s government as monetary
policy has been proven ineffective so far. However, it is of concern, that tax reduction only affects
the supply-side, and if the demand-side stays unaltered, the tax cut might not be able to boost the
economy due to the insufficient demand. This problem could be solved by using expansionary fiscal
policy in form of government spending, however, that again raises concerns of crowding out and
reduced investment.



Word count: 747



Bibliography


1) Finamore, David. ”Fiscal policy: The role of fiscal policy” in Economics: Supporting Every
Learner across the IB Continuum, edited by Christian Bryan, page 178. Harlow, Essex: Pearson
Education Limited, 2014.
2) Finamore, David. ”Monetary policy: The role of monetary policy” in Economics: Supporting
Every Learner across the IB Continuum, edited by Christian Bryan, page 183. Harlow, Essex:
Pearson Education Limited, 2014.
3) “India Delivers Surprise Corporate Tax Cuts to Boost Economy.” BBC News. BBC, September
20, 2019. https://www.bbc.com/news/business-49764964
4) Kagan, Julia. “Corporate Tax.” Investopedia. Investopedia, January 29, 2020.
https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/corporatetax.asp
