 “Meat, Butter [Sugar and Vegetable Oil] Considered

       ‘Luxuries’ As Tajiks Face Steep Price Hikes”
                  Source: RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty (URL)




                          Date accessed: Nov 29, 2020

                          Date of article: Nov 1, 2020

                      Date of commentary: Nov 30, 2020

                    Section of the syllabus: Microeconomics

Key concepts used: Supply/Demand, PED (price elasticity of demand), Price ceiling

                               Word Count: 747
                                                                       Candidate code: jdk323


The Article


* Note that the commentary only focuses on the highlighted paragraphs of the article below.




Ozoda is making mantu, a traditional Tajik dumpling dish for dinner, but instead of meat she

fills the dough wrappings with chopped onion and potatoes.


“My children complained about eating pumpkin mantu every time, so I’m putting potatoes in

this time -- we can’t afford meat anymore,” Ozoda, a mother of four in Tajikistan’s Sughd

Province said.


“We survive on bread, pasta, pumpkin, and potatoes.”


Breakfasts mostly consist of bread and tea with sugar, with the exception of “the salary day”

when the schoolteacher receives her wages and the family “splurges on eggs and sausages for

the kids.”




                                                                                       | Page 2
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


“Butter? Butter is a luxury I can’t even think about. I don’t turn to that side of the bazaar

anymore,” said Ozoda. “People have a lot less money this year.”


Tajikistan, the poorest country in Central Asia, is experiencing steep price hikes on food that

have put a further strain on a population that is already struggling to put adequate supplies on

their tables.


It’s forcing many families to forego important nutritious food and only purchase basic staples,

an alarming trend in a country where an estimated one-third of the population faces

malnutrition.


According to the World Food Program, 47 percent of the people in Tajikistan live on less than

$1.33 a day and an estimated 30 percent of the population are malnourished.


The coronavirus pandemic has sent food prices soaring in many countries, as it forced border

closures, restricted transport networks, and disrupted import and export systems.


Tajikistan has been hit particularly hard.


Millions of households in the remittances-dependent country saw their main source of income

vanish as many migrant workers were unable to travel to Russia and Kazakhstan this year.


According to the Labor Ministry, the number of Tajik migrants who went abroad for work in

2020 decreased by 57 percent compared to last year.


Even those who managed to go have had their earnings dwindle due to pandemic restrictions

in the host countries.


In April, the government ordered farmers to grow more vegetables and grains instead of

inedible crops, and to try to get three rounds of harvests to help ensure food security in the

country.


                                                                                          | Page 3
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


Officials also called on the population to use their land plots and backyards as well as

greenhouses to grow vegetables. Households were urged to harvest and store a two-year food

supply.




Dushanbe also introduced a ban on the export of some agricultural products, including grains,

potatoes, legumes, eggs, and meat.


But with 93 percent of its lands covered by mountains, it’s a tall order for Tajikistan to

become self-reliant in producing food for its 9.3 million inhabitants.


A study by the World Food Program also found that some 97 percent of Tajikistan’s arable

land is subject to soil degradation.




Tough Choices




                                                                                         | Page 4
                                                                          Candidate code: jdk323


In mid-October, RFE/RL’s Tajik Service reported that prices for vegetable oil and sugar went

up by as much as 30 percent in many markets in the capital, Dushanbe, where a smaller

uptick was recorded in the cost of other staples, such as eggs, meat, and rice.


The price of sugar went up from $0.6 to $1, while the cost of vegetable oil rose from $1.16 to

$1.55 per kilo.


Such price increases make a big difference to ordinary households in Tajikistan, where the

average monthly salary is about $160 per month and the average pension for retirees is $33.

Those figures include a recent across-the-board increase by the state.


The majority of Tajiks, including city dwellers, buy their groceries in bazaars where prices

are cheaper than in supermarkets. In such bazaars it is customary for buyers to also haggle for

lower prices.


Food prices do vary somewhat in different regions and sometimes even in different markets

of the same city.


Customers complain that prices constantly fluctuate -- “different prices every week” -- and

that they often go up without notice or explanation. Vegetable and fruit prices often go down

during the prime part of the harvest season.




                                                                                          | Page 5
                                                                           Candidate code: jdk323


Figures provided by the state statistics agency indicate that the average cost of rice, flour, all

types of meat, cooking oil, eggs, sugar, and tea in Dushanbe were higher in October

compared to the previous month.


At the same time, the cost of milk, wheat, and beans remained stable, while the price of

potatoes and cabbage went down during the same period.


According to the statistics committee, in the week starting October 19 the average price of

beef in Dushanbe was $5 per kilogram, black tea $4.6, rice $1.3, and flour $0.47 per kilo.


A liter of milk cost $0.45 and a pack of 10 eggs cost about $1.


On the streets of Dushanbe, some customers told RFE/RL’s Tajik Service that they had

noticed the higher prices and the new costs were not commensurate with people's budgets,

particularly those facing unemployment or working in low-paid professions.


Every somoni counts in a country where the gross domestic product per capita was only $877

before the pandemic struck earlier this year.


Dushanbe resident Rustam Nasriddinov said he no longer knows how to get by with his

paltry salary amid the higher prices.


“Prices rise every day, by one somoni, two somonis. I don’t know what the reason is. I just

found out that a 5-kilo pack of sunflower oil now costs $7.2 in Dushanbe,” Nasriddinov told

RFE/RL.


Many customers say they are increasingly turning to cheaper and unhealthier options, such as

buying cotton-seed oil instead of sunflower oil for cooking.


Others are cutting back even on unaffordable “luxuries.”




                                                                                            | Page 6
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


“I don’t buy eggs, meat, and fruit anymore. Even apples are too expensive for me at $1-$1.4 a

kilo,” another Dushanbe resident told RFE/RL.


“I lost my job as a taxi driver in Dushanbe and now I depend on corn and wheat that my

family sends me from our village,” another man said.


In Sughd, Ozoda said, families like hers have to make “tough choices.”


“For a snack, I make 'tolqon,' mixing crushed dry mulberry and walnuts that we harvest from

the trees in our backyard. But we can’t eat them all -- we’re selling half of the crop to buy

firewood or coal for the winter,” she added.


Ozoda said her family was better off last year with the money her migrant laborer husband

sent from Russia. Now he does odd jobs such as repairing people’s homes or working at fruit

farms during Tajikistan's harvest season.


The couple makes about $120 to $150 a month and most of it is spent on food. The family

needs at least $500 for coal as the winter approaches.


Even before the pandemic, food shortages in Tajikistan meant that the average person was

deprived of some 227 calories needed per day, according to a study by the Economist

Intelligence Unit (EIU).


By comparison, the figure was only six in Russia, 17 in Kazakhstan, and 43 in neighboring

Uzbekistan.


Tajikistan ranked 93rd among 113 countries on the EIU’s Food Security Index in December

2019.




                                                                                         | Page 7
                                                                       Candidate code: jdk323


State Wage Increase


The government raised the salaries of public-sector workers and pensions by 15 percent in

September and introduced an additional pay raise and bonuses for health-care workers.

Officers and other law-enforcement sector workers, the judiciary system, and the military saw

their wages increase by 10 percent.


But many people say more needs to be done to help people by investing in the resources

needed to create jobs and greater income generation in the country.


Some residents even suggest that authorities should open subsidized food stores to help

protect the most vulnerable until the situation improves.


“The government needs to listen to the people, real people,” said a journalist from the

southern Kulob region who asked for anonymity for fear he could be punished for speaking

critically.


“You can see an abundance of food in the bazaars and yes, you see people buying stuff, some

even not looking at the prices. But that is not the majority.”


He concluded: “Anyone who says the majority of Tajiks are eating an adequate amount of

food, is detached from reality and has no idea what’s going on.”




                                                                                       | Page 8
                                                                      Candidate code: jdk323


Commentary


      The article discusses the consequences of the pandemic on supply chains in Tajikistan,

resulting in price jumps of several food staples. Hence, this commentary analyzes the

situation through supply and demand - quantity of a commodity firm is willing to produce and

quantity consumers are willing to purchase at different prices; PED - responsiveness of

product’s quantity demanded to its price changes; and price ceiling - the government-imposed

maximum price producers are allowed to charge for their products.


      Several food staples are experiencing rising prices in Tajikistan due to decreases in

supplies from abroad. One of the many given examples is sugar, whose price has risen to $1

from $0.6 per kilo, according to article's 10th highlighted paragraph. Below is the

supply/demand diagram to illustrate this situation:




      The diagram above shows the sugar market, which also applies to other food staples

with rising prices. Assume Q1 sugar was being supplied and demanded at $0.6 before the

pandemic, forming the equilibrium point a. Due to supply cuts from outside, the supply curve


                                                                                      | Page 9
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323


has shifted inwards (S1→S2). Initially, since prices don't rise immediately, the market has

moved from the initial equilibrium to disequilibrium point b, creating a shortage of Q2Q1. This

has pressured the price upwards, causing a movement along the S2 curve until the current

equilibrium point (c) was reached, where the shortage has been eliminated at the cost of

higher price ($1) and lower demanded quantity (Q3) of sugar in the market.


     Additionally, since food staples are primary commodities, they have low PED, meaning

a price change will lead to a proportionally smaller change in demand. This is mainly because

they are necessities and have few or no substitutes. Why is it important? Because domestic

producers might be overpricing them to generate more revenue, knowing that even if they

increase the price, there will still be huge quantities demanded. However, these high prices

might overburden the consumers when they are already experiencing unemployment and low

incomes as the borders to Russia and Kazakhstan got locked, according to article’s 6-7th

highlighted paragraphs.


     To address this problem, the government can impose a price ceiling on food staples

under discussion. This would limit the rising prices to ensure cheaper food for consumers.

Let’s take sugar as an example again. The current market price is $1/kilo and the price ceiling

could be imposed at $0.8/kilo, as shown in the diagram below:




                                                                                       | Page 10
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323




     The diagram above shows the price ceiling for sugar, which could be applied to other

food staples too. Without government intervention, Qa would be supplied and demanded at

$1/kilo. When the government imposes a price ceiling at $0.8, Q2 will be demanded because

the price has fallen, and only Q1 will be supplied because less profit discourages production,

creating an excess demand of Q1Q2. To eliminate this shortage, the government will have to

further intervene by either shifting D leftwards to point b, which is counterproductive because

it limits the consumption at Q1, or by shifting S rightwards to point c, which results in more

sugar supplied and demanded. Thus, attempting to shift S rightwards is the better option,

which could be achieved by either subsidizing the firms to encourage production or by

producing and providing those food staples directly, increasing the sugar supply. By doing

this, the government will force the market to move to equilibrium point c, where Q2 will be

supplied and demanded.


     However, there are few things to consider. Firstly, this might create an opportunity cost

to the government lowering their spending in other areas of the economy, which might be

crucial during the pandemic when they have to buy vaccines or spend on healthcare in


                                                                                       | Page 11
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


general. Secondly, this is a short-term solution, because, in the long term, the government will

eventually have to raise taxes in order to continue subsidizing or producing extra food. Lastly,

in reality, this policy alone might not be the answer. Because the scale of the problem is

greater than just affecting the food market, due to job losses and inability to work abroad on

account of pandemic. Additionally, even with subsidies, domestic producers on their own

might not have the capacity to fully provide the country.


      Overall, this is a difficult situation for a heavily remittance-dependent country, as the

article states. Part of the problem can be addressed by setting price ceilings and subsidizing

the firms, but that might not fully solve it since borders are still closed and people cannot go

abroad to work.




Reference to article:

      Najibullah, Farangis. “Meat, Butter Considered ‘Luxuries’ as Tajiks Face Steep Price

Hikes.”           RadioFreeEurope/RadioLiberty,               1           Nov.           2020,

www.rferl.org/a/meat-butter-considered-luxuries-as-tajiks-face-steep-price-hikes-/30923885.

html. Accessed 29 Nov. 2020.




                                                                                        | Page 12
