“In South India, Amazon Builds Its Largest Office Yet”
                          Source: The New York Times (URL)




                          Date accessed: February 21, 2021

                 Date of article: Aug 25, 2020 / updated Aug 31, 2020

                       Date of commentary: February 23, 2021

                   Section of the syllabus: Development economics

Key concepts used: FDI, economic growth/development, negative production externalities

                                  Word Count: 744
                                                                            Candidate code: jdk323


The Article


* Note that the commentary only focuses on the highlighted paragraphs of the article below.




The austere building is hardly distinguishable in the landscape of glass and concrete buildings

making up Asia’s Silicon Valley, as Hyderabad, India, is known. It is one of Amazon’s latest

developments, the online retailer’s largest office building in the world.




                                                                                          | Page 2
                                                                          Candidate code: jdk323


With plans to cement its place as the center of gravity around which online retail revolves,

Amazon has turned to India, the world’s fastest-growing market for internet users. And it has

picked Hyderabad, a city of nearly 10 million in India’s south, as its base of operations there.


But the project faces challenges, including pushback from local businesses and politicians.


Hyderabad has emerged in a few short years as a technology and financial center and a

beacon for young talent. The city, which saw the biggest surge in tech office space last year,

is already a base in India for other multinational tech companies such as Facebook, Google,

Microsoft and Apple, which spent $25 million for the development of its offices there.


“Hyderabad is a known software tech talent center, and the government has been an enabler

for us to have a campus this size,” said Minari Shah, an Amazon spokeswoman. “This is an

important confirmation of how India continues to be important to Amazon.”


Over the last decade, the technology behemoth has woven itself into the fabric of Indian life.

And now, four years after construction began, the Hyderabad office, Amazon’s first fully

owned office outside the United States, joins 40 other offices, 67 shipping centers, 1,400

delivery stations and a work force of more than 60,000 (plus 155,000 contractors) in the

country.


The record size of the building — 1.8 million square feet — and the total campus area are

equal to nearly 65 football fields. They have come to symbolize a defining feature of India’s

booming tech industry: the inexorable presence of international tech companies.


When Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, visited India in January, he was met with an antitrust

case by Indian regulators, who are investigating Amazon and the Indian e-commerce giant

Flipkart, which is owned largely by Walmart.




                                                                                         | Page 3
                                                                          Candidate code: jdk323


India bans foreign direct investment in retail, a shift from policy in the United States and

Britain. By law, Amazon and other foreign-owned e-commerce firms are required to be

neutral marketplaces reliant on independent sellers.


But Praveen Khandelwal, founder and general secretary of the Confederation of All India

Traders, which oversees 70 million traders and 40,000 trade associations, argues that the firm

has hurt domestic trade, resulting in the closure of thousands of homegrown businesses across

the country.


Amazon’s new Hyderabad office, he said, is merely a way to “push for control and

dominance over Indian retail trade in a more structured way.” Mr. Khandelwal led protests

against Amazon’s trade practices this year.


India’s retail regulator is investigating Amazon over allegations that it is using deep discounts

and preferred sellers, said Satish Meena, a senior analyst for the global technology research

firm Forrester.


“There are loopholes they’re exploiting; everyone knows that,” Mr. Meena said.


The challenges emerging in India echo stories in the United States, where American tech

giants have squeezed smaller rivals and business owners. Amazon is facing antitrust charges

in the European Union, and Mr. Bezos and other tech titans were grilled by U.S. lawmakers

in July about their anticompetitive practices.




                                                                                         | Page 4
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323




Amazon’s 15-story Hyderabad office opened last year. It features prayer rooms, a small

synthetic cricket pitch, 49 elevators, a helipad and a cafeteria open 24 hours a day on a

campus that, according to the company, is made of 2.5 times more steel than the Eiffel Tower.

It’s home to 7,000 employees out of an expected work force of 15,000, largely comprising

technology teams focused on using machine learning and software development to innovate

services — such as Amazon Pay’s cash load service for digital transactions in a country with

190 million citizens that do not use banks — as well as customer service workers.


Representatives for Amazon declined to comment on the cost of the development, but

revealed to Bloomberg that it cost “hundreds of millions of dollars” to build. (The campus is

Amazon’s largest, but the company plans to open a second headquarters in Arlington, Va.,

which could be as large as eight million square feet.)


Amazon and Flipkart bill themselves as e-commerce marketplaces, matching buyers with

independent sellers. That has enabled Amazon to sell products by sellers such as Cloudtail, at

prices lower than independent sellers.




                                                                                      | Page 5
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


The impact of Amazon’s strategy has been noted. For the past couple of years, Satinder

Wadhwa has struggled to keep his business alive in Greater Kailash, South Delhi, amid the

growth of online retail. His specialty watch store, Time & Style, used to be filled with throngs

of locals. Now, Mr. Wadhwa estimates he gets half as many customers.


“People have stopped coming to the market; that means they’re buying online,” Mr. Wadhwa

said. “If they’re getting a better price and delivery at home, why will they come to us?”


It’s a question many business owners across India are asking. “Amazon is financially strong,

their reach is strong,” Mr. Wadhwa said.


Since construction on the Hyderabad office began in 2016, Amazon made some promising

appeals to locals: It started an Amazon Fresh store for grocery delivery in Bangalore. It also

started Prime Reading with books in Hindi and Tamil, and introduced an online pharmacy

amid the pandemic.




The retail behemoth’s desire for expansion is easy to explain. India’s e-commerce industry is

still in its infancy, nearing 120 million online shoppers in 2018 out of a population of more

than one billion.



                                                                                        | Page 6
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323


In 2018, Amazon was the second-largest online retailer in India, trailing Flipkart, with 32

percent market share (compared with 41 percent in the United States). And analysts at

Forrester predict e-commerce sales in the country will reach nearly $86 billion by 2024.




                                                                                      | Page 7
                                                                            Candidate code: jdk323


Commentary


      This article is about Amazon opening its largest office in Hyderabad of India, directly

investing in e-commerce of this fast-growing economy. This is an example of foreign direct

investment (FDI), referring to an investment made by a firm in one country into the business

of another, gaining some or full control.


      India represents a huge growing market in Asia, which is the reason why Amazon is

investing there to access this market. The 7th highlighted paragraph of the article states that

India’s e-commerce industry itself is still in an infancy stage, providing only about 120

million of its more than billion population. Hence, this FDI can satisfy the rest of the demand

at the same time of generating income, tax revenue, and employment to the country, leading

to economic growth in the short term, which might contribute to economic development in

the long term. The PPF diagram below illustrates this situation:




      Since investment refers to spending on capital goods, as it increases there will be an

increase in at least the quantity of capital. The capital is a factor of production, so as a result,




                                                                                            | Page 8
                                                                          Candidate code: jdk323


the potential output of the economy, shown as PPF1, shifts out to PPF2, generating economic

growth.


      However, the government must take into consideration the possible negative outcomes

the company might create in the long run while producing and delivering. The examples

include but are not limited to depletion or overuse of resources, environmental and

respiratory health issues. Therefore, if not regulated carefully, it might have negative costs to

locals and the environment, and we can show this in a diagram of negative production

externalities:




      Because of the extra cost to the society and environment, the MPC < MSC. The

company concerning just about its private costs produces Qm at Pm, instead of producing Qopt

at Popt, which creates the social optimum point where MSC = MSB. Hence, there occurs a

market failure and welfare loss of Qopt to Qm to the society, shown as a shaded triangle (◀ ),

where MSC > MSB.




                                                                                         | Page 9
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


      This direct investment, through economic growth, can spur development in many ways

possible, improving living standards. Firstly, the 6th highlighted paragraph states that a fully

built Amazon office provides 15,000 jobs. This might enable some poor locals to escape

poverty, and middle-income people to have more disposable income, which then they can

spend on their health, education, or leisure activities, directly improving their living

standards. Similarly, more employment means less government spending on unemployment

benefits, so the money can be spent elsewhere. Secondly, the government can generate huge

amounts of tax revenues, which then can be spent on providing merit goods and public

services such as education, healthcare, and pensions, solve those environmental problems or

pay some of their external debts. Lastly, if it leads to growth, then it will attract further

investment, securing the sustainability of growth and development, ceteris paribus,

everything being equal.


      On the other hand, there might be several disadvantages associated with opening up to

this MNC, which might hinder the development. Some of the possibilities include

environmental damage and health issues, as described earlier; damage to domestic infant

businesses who can’t compete with Amazon leading to job losses; later on, the company

might shift to more capital intensive production rather than labor-intensive, which creates

further unemployment; it might bring its management team and provide locals only with

low-paid jobs and so on.


      The winners, in this case, include Amazon benefiting from the fast-growing market,

cheap labor, and available resources; the government gaining huge tax revenues and paying

less for unemployment benefits; people, who benefit from government spending generated

from tax revenues; people, who get jobs directly or indirectly from this MNC; and consumers

who will have more variety of products at cheaper prices. The losers are local infant




                                                                                       | Page 10
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


businesses giving up their profits, and local people who might suffer from health issues,

environmental pollution, or lose their jobs in those local businesses.


      The government can address these forthcoming issues by strengthening the regulations

over the company, such as imposing a carbon tax encouraging them to switch to more

renewable sources; empower the labor unions so they can protect the workers' rights, or

investing in local businesses.


      Overall, the extent to which this direct investment might be helpful or damaging to the

development depends on the ability of the government to regulate its actions. Therefore, the

government should let the company run its business, bringing in economic growth, but focus

more on its regulation policies.




Reference to article:

      Abdul, Geneva. “In South India, Amazon Builds Its Largest Office Yet.” The New York

Times, 25 Aug. 2020, www.nytimes.com/2020/08/25/business/amazon-hyderabad-india.html.

Accessed 21 Feb. 2021.




                                                                                      | Page 11
