Link to the article:
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-sugar-imports-exclusive/exclusive-china-sugar-industry-to
-lobby-government-for-extension-of-hefty-tariffs-on-imports-sources-idUSKCN1VR1N4
This article talks about China’s government considering to extend the tariffs on sugar imports to
“protect China’s struggling domestic sector.” “A tariff is a tax placed on imports.1” Tariffs are a
form of trade protection, used by the government to help local producers develop, however, a
welfare loss arises in the process (Figure 1).




                                                                                                                Figure 1
After the tariff, the world producers want to pass tariff costs to the consumers, therefore the supply
curve shifts upwards from Sworld to Stariff and the equilibrium price increases from Pworld to Ptariff.
After the price increase consumers buy less — the equilibrium quantity falls from Q4 to Q3. Due to
the increased price domestic suppliers now supply more, thus their share of the market increases
from Q1 to Q2. After the tariff quantity imported has fallen from Q4-Q1 to Q3-Q2. They must pay a
fixed tax to the government for each unit they sell, thus area B+C represent the government revenue
(green area).

The minimum amount of revenue for international producers to produce Q2 is E+F, however, after
the tariff, quantity Q2 is produced by local producers who need a minimum revenue E+F+A, thus
from society’s standpoint the revenue from area A is lost. Area D is lost as well, because consumer
surplus is lost as they now purchase less at a higher price, and this doesn’t become producer surplus.
Thus the area A+D is the welfare loss associated with the tariff (red area).
1
  Finamore, David. ”International trade: Restrictions on free trade: Trade protection” in Economics: Supporting Every Learner across the IB
Continuum, edited by Christian Bryan, page 202. Harlow, Essex: Pearson Education Limited, 2014.
The domestic producers benefit in this situation as they now face less competition and don’t need to
engage in price wars, but can rather keep “promoting healthy and stable development of the
sector.” This development means, that producers expand their businesses and open new factories,
which benefits the domestic labour force as now there is a bigger demand for workers and
unemployment decreases.

In addition, less competition means, that domestic firms can invest some money into research and
development, which would shift the potential LRAS curve outwards, thus promoting long-term
growth for the whole country. (Figure 2)




                                                                           Figure 2

After investing in research and development, manufacturers can now produce more using the same
resources, thus LRAS curve shifts outwards from LRAS0 to LRAS1. There is a movement alongside
the AD curve and the market clearing point changes from (Y0;P0) to (Y1;P1) , thus China’s Real
GDP has increased (Y1>Y0) and deflation has happened (P1<P0).

Additionally, research and development would improve China’s international competitiveness,
which is crucial as currently “amid a global supply surplus” the local producers cannot “compete
with foreign rivals due to higher production costs.” Improving international competitiveness would
improve the balance of trade, which would lead to an increase in real GDP once again promoting
economic development in the country — If real GDP increases, then firms in the country grow
bigger, which allows them to experience economies of scale — Reduction of production costs and
increased efficiency which leads to outwards LRAS shift.

Furthermore, government benefits from tariffs in the form of tariff revenue it gets from the foreign
producers. This money could then be spent on public goods or other underdeveloped sectors to
further promote economic growth.

However, there are also disadvantages to this tariff, with one of the concerns being cost-push
inflation. Local manufacturers requiring sugar for their products, such as candy makers would get
hurt from this as their costs of production increase. Additionally, regular consumers lose out from
tariffs, because now the market provides less sugar at a higher price, thus reducing their purchasing
power.

Another concern regarding the tariff is the associated welfare loss. In the long-run, tariffs might
prove detrimental to the society as a whole due to the inefficient manufacturers producing more
than the efficient ones, however, this effect might be offset if the local producers don’t stay
inefficient due to decreased competition but rather finally develop and become competitive after not
being damaged by some regions who in the past “have exported sugar products at below cost
prices.”

To conclude, the tariff could greatly benefit the domestic sugar sector, which would be able to
develop due to decreased competition. This development paired together with the extra government
revenue from tariffs could play a substantial role in promoting China’s long-term economic growth,
however, if this policy will work depends on whether domestic producers will become more
efficient due to economies of scale or rather will stay less efficient due to decreased competition.
Additionally, it still remains to be seen how badly will domestic consumers and sugar-related
manufacturers be hurt from cost-push inflation.

Word count: 749

Bibliography

1) Finamore, David. ”International trade: Restrictions on free trade: Trade protection” in
Economics: Supporting Every Learner across the IB Continuum, edited by Christian Bryan, page
202. Harlow, Essex: Pearson Education Limited, 2014.
2) Gu, Hallie, and Dominique Patton. “Exclusive: China Sugar Industry to Lobby Government for
Extension of Hefty Tariffs on Imports - Sources.” Edited by Hogue, Tom and Louise Heavens.
Reuters. Thomson Reuters, September 6, 2019.
https://www.reuters.com/article/us-china-sugar-imports-exclusive/exclusive-china-sugar-industry-to
-lobby-government-for-extension-of-hefty-tariffs-on-imports-sources-idUSKCN1VR1N4
