IBDP HL Economics Internal Assessment
          Microeconomics Commentary

               Word Count: 748




                  Page 1 of 8
HITTING THE SWEET SPOT



THE NEW SUGAR TAX IS AIMED AT CURBING MALAYSIA’S SWEET TOOTH

CPG, FMCG & RETAIL | 18-07-2019

Much has been said about the state of Malaysia’s health, with the 2015 National Health

and Morbidity Survey reporting that 48% of Malaysian adults are overweight or obese

and at risk for lifestyle-related diseases such as diabetes, hypertension and cancer.


To curb this burgeoning health problem, the Malaysian government introduced a new

sugar tax in November 2018 aimed at reducing Malaysians’ consumption of sugary

drinks. As of July 1, 2019, a MYR 0.40 tax per litre will be added to the price of soft

drinks with more than 5 grams of sugar per 100 ml and juice or vegetable-based drinks

with more than 12 grams of sugar per 100 ml.


MANUFACTURERS GET CREATIVE AMID NEW TAX

The government has imposed the tax at the manufacturer level, and we expect

manufacturers to pass the increased cost on to customers.


When pressed, it’s common for manufacturers to reduce the size of their products

while leaving the cost unchanged, which makes the impact of the overall cost less

visible to consumers. In fact, this has become a common cost-reduction strategy over

the past few years. And this new sugar tax could be a reason for manufacturers to

continue using this strategy to protect their profit margins. If downsizing a product is

too constant or highly noticeable to the consumers, however, consumers may lose

faith in brands and consider alternatives.




                                       Page 2 of 8
But manufacturers aren’t going to simply address the issue with price and pack sizes.

We also expect to see an increase in low- and zero-sugar beverage variants in the

market, particularly in light of the government’s push for a healthier Malaysia. Over the

past 12 months, low-sugar carbonated soft drinks have tripled their share of the

beverage market, signifying manufacturers’ aggressiveness in experimenting and

testing consumers’ acceptance of healthier drink options. For example, bottled water

sales are up 15% over the past 12 months, and we expect this trend to continue.


HOW WILL MALAYSIAN CONSUMERS REACT?

Despite the drive to be healthier, Malaysians love their carbonated soft drinks, which

are affected by the sugar tax. Carbonated beverages are the most-consumed type of

beverage in Malaysia, accounting for 21% of the beverage market.


Despite the stronghold these beverages have in the market, a recent Nielsen study on

consumer awareness of the sugar tax in Malaysia found that a majority of consumers

intend to change their purchase behaviour in light of the new sugar tax. One way they

plan to change is by purchasing fewer carbonated soft drinks. In this price-sensitive

market, consumers say they would either buy smaller beverage packs or buy less

quantities in general, thereby altering their lifestyles in the process.




To prevent a decline in their overall sales, manufacturers should market their low-

sugar variants more aggressively through the effective use of branding and advertising.

By raising awareness about the appeal of healthier variants, manufacturers can attract

consumers to low-sugar variants. And since these options are not affected by the new

tax, consumers can buy them in the same quantities.



                                        Page 3 of 8
THE SUGAR TAX IS NOT A NEW PHENOMENON

The idea of a sugar tax is not unique to Malaysia. In fact, more than 40 countries

around the globe have some form of sugar tax on the books. Given the notoriety of

the concept, we can envision three possible scenarios that could play out in Malaysia

based on the effects that we’ve seen in other countries:


1. Consumption of soda drops—temporarily. In Mexico, one of the world’s largest soda

markets, the sugar tax caused the price of the affected beverages, including

carbonated soft drinks, to rise 10%. Consequently, consumption declined by 3%

shortly after the tax came took effect, but returned to pre-tax levels just two years later.


2. Consumer preferences outweigh change. In the U.K., the sugar tax has encouraged

manufacturers to reformulate their offerings and make low-sugar options available.

Despite the efforts of manufacturers, however, many consumers have stated that their

consumption behavior has not changed.


3. Soda consumption drops dramatically. In Saudi Arabia and the Philippines, the

sugar tax led to a steep decline in soda consumption, falling by 14% and 6%,

respectively. The pullback led to a notable rise in bottled water sales.


The next year will tell us which of these three possible outcomes will play out in

Malaysia. The implementation of the sugar tax won’t, however, solve Malaysia’s health

problem. It is, however, a component of the overall issue and is a step in the right

direction, as it will lead to increased availability and awareness on the healthier

beverages available in the market.


https://www.nielsen.com/apac/en/insights/article/2019/hitting-the-sweet-spot/



                                        Page 4 of 8
Commentary

   This article discusses the imposition of MYR0.40 per unit tax, a type of specific tax

which is “a tax calculated as an absolute amount per unit of the good or service sold”

(Tragakes, 2012) to correct negative externalities of consumption in Malaysia.

   Traditionally sugary drinks are considered demerit goods - “goods that are

considered to be undesirable for consumers and are overprovided by the market”

(Tragakes, 2012). Hence, market failure - the misallocation of resources from a social

optimal perspective arises, imposing undesirable impacts onto third parties.

   Shown diagrammatically below, market forces are driven by self-interest

maximization incentives. Consumers only consider private benefits when consuming;

producers only consider private costs when producing. Thus, market output is where

marginal private cost equates marginal private benefit. However, social optimal output

is where social cost equates marginal social benefit where externalities must be

considered. Therefore, market output Qe exceeds social optimal output Qopt as

external cost of sugary drinks is ignored.




                                       Page 5 of 8
   “48% of Malaysian adults are overweight or obese and at risk for lifestyle-related

diseases”. Negative externalities - the negative impacts that affect third parties, would

arise because the government would allocate more resources on healthcare, leading

to opportunity cost as less amount of resources could be spent on other social needs.

Moreover, health problems may affect productivity, hindering economic growth.

   Therefore, indirect tax may help correct market failure - producers would pass part

of the tax onto consumers by raising the price, discouraging consumption. However,

the effectiveness is affected by price elasticity of demand. In the UK, "many consumers

have stated that their consumption has not changed" despite substitutes available. It

suggests that consumption of sugary drinks could be habit-forming and the demand is

price inelastic. In Figure 2. the price inelastic demand allows the producers to pass a

large proportion of tax, as shown by differing tax incidences, onto consumers by

                                       Page 6 of 8
raising the price significantly (P1 → P2) as consumers can only reduce consumption to

a proportionally lesser extent (Q1 → Q2). Therefore, tax alone may not be effective in

discouraging consumption unless raised significantly.




   Additionally, in “price-sensitive” Malaysia “a majority of consumers” plan to

purchase “fewer carbonated soft drinks”. Since the availability of substitutes in the

market is a determinant of PED, tax could be more effective in discouraging

consumption amongst low-income consumers in developing countries like Malaysia

as their demand tends to be more price elastic over developed countries like the UK.

   However, indirect tax is regressive which means the tax would represent a smaller

proportion of income when income increases. The distribution of income and poverty

would worsen because low-income consumers spend a larger proportion of their

budget on sugary drinks, having less to spend on other areas including essential

goods. This may lower the standard of living and worsen poverty. However, it also may


                                      Page 7 of 8
benefit low-income consumers in the long run because indirect tax would be more

effective in discouraging consumption of sugary drinks and avoiding long-term

potential health problems. On the other hand, richer consumers may not suffer in the

short run as the price hike is negligible, however are more likely to suffer in the long-

term as health problems such as diabetes may occur.

   Comparatively, using legislation such as prohibiting the sales of unhealthy drinks

in schools or colleges may be more effective than taxation as the availability of demerit

goods would be reduced. Furthermore, legislation is not affected by PED which makes

it more viable. However, legislation would lead to allocative inefficiency in that it does

not allow price signalling leading to loss of consumer sovereignty, and resources must

be used to enforce said legislation, creating opportunity cost. Alternatively, negative

advertising or education that reduces the perceived benefits of sugary drinks may

effectively reduce consumption in the long run, as consumers may choose not to

consume by free will. Furthermore, it may convince manufacturers to decrease sugary

drink production in accordance to consumer sovereignty as social trends may increase

demand for lower-sugar substitutes - “low-sugar carbonated soft drinks have tripled

their share of the beverage market.” However, a large time-lag is present, which may

decrease effectiveness in the short-term.

   In conclusion, if carefully planned, indirect tax could be effective in correcting

market failure of demerit goods, as it would not only discourage consumption via

higher prices, but also increase availability and awareness of healthier beverages in

the market through market mechanisms. However, the government must be astute in

its implementation; over or under-taxing the market would lead to government failure

and may reduce the tax’s effectiveness.



                                        Page 8 of 8
