“China slaps up to 200% tariffs on Australian wine ”

                     Source: BBC NEWS (URL)




                   Date accessed: March 23, 2021

                 Date of article: November 27, 2020

                Date of commentary: March 24, 2021

           Section of the syllabus: International Economics

               Key concepts used: Tariff and Dumping

                          Word Count: 745
                                                                          Candidate code: jdk323


The Article

* Note that the commentary only focuses on the highlighted paragraphs of the article below.




China will impose taxes on Australian wine of up to 212%, starting on Saturday.

Its commerce ministry said these were temporary anti-dumping measures to stop subsidised
imports of Australian wine.

The duties will range from 107% to 212%, intensifying trade tensions between the two
countries.

In recent months, Beijing has targeted Australian imports including coal, sugar, barley and
lobsters amid political tensions.

Officials in China have argued that some Australian wine is being sold cheaper there
(dumped) than in its home market through the use of subsidies. Australia has rejected that
assertion.

China is the biggest destination for Australia's wine exports, accounting for 39% in the first
nine months of 2020, according to Wine Australia.




                                                                                        | Page 2
                                                                         Candidate code: jdk323


China has been carrying out a year-long investigation into anti-dumping, looking at wines
being sold in China at prices alleged to be lower than in Australia.

Following the announcement on Friday, Treasury Wine Estates (TWE), one of the world's
biggest winemakers saw its share price slump more than 13%.

TWE, the maker of Penfolds and Wolf Blass, has built up a powerhouse business selling into
China which analysts estimate is worth A$4bn (£2.2bn; $3bn) alone after six years of robust
growth.

Other Australian winemakers have been singled out alongside TWE, including Casella Wines
and Australian Swan Vintage.

China's commerce ministry didn't specify how long the measures would last for.


'Extremely disappointed'

Australia's agriculture minister David Littleproud reacted to the announcement via Twitter,
saying the government was "extremely disappointed".

"The Australian government categorically rejects any allegation that our wine producers are
dumping product into China," he said.

"Australian wine is hugely popular both in China and across the globe due to its high quality
and we are confident that a full and thorough investigation will confirm this."

Australia's trade minister Simon Birmingham said the new tariffs make Australian wine
unviable and unmarketable in China.

"This is a very distressing time for many hundreds of Australian wine producers, who have
built, in good faith, a sound market in China," he said.

Mr Birmingham has raised the idea of taking China to the World Trade Organisation (WTO)
over the restrictions.




                                                                                       | Page 3
                                                                          Candidate code: jdk323


Growing tensions

Political relations between China and Australia have deteriorated this year to their lowest
point in decades, experts say.

Australia backed a global inquiry into the origins of the coronavirus in April, and effectively
singled out China, according top Chinese diplomat.

Since then, Australian imports have been under the spotlight while Chinese students and
tourists were warned against travelling to Australia citing fears of racism.




‌




                                                                                        | Page 4
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323


Commentary


      The article reports on China imposing up to 212% tariff on Australian wine, calling it

“... temporary anti-dumping measures to stop subsidized imports ...”. Dumping is a practice

of selling goods in international markets at prices below their production costs and

internationally considered unfair and illegal, whereas tariff refers to a government-imposed

tax on imported goods.


       According to the 5th and 7th highlighted paragraphs of the article, it seems that

Chinese officials have based their move on a year-long investigation of Australian wine

dumping, which they think are due to government subsidies. If it is true, then this enables the

Australian producers to produce and export at prices lower than their normal production

costs, outcompeting the Chinese producers. The diagram below illustrates this scenario:




                                                                                       | Page 5
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323


       Before Australia subsidized its producers, 0Q3 was being demanded and supplied at

PA in the Chinese wine market, imports being Q2Q3 and 0Q2 domestically produced. After the

subsidy, Australian producers are able to produce and export at lower prices (PA+subsidy) than

before (PA), so SA shifts downwards to SA+subsidy, where overall consumption increases

(0Q3→0Q4). Hence, domestic supply reduces (0Q2→0Q1) since they cannot compete with

cheaper Australian wine anymore, and imports increase (Q2Q3→Q1Q4).


       The Australian producers gain significant benefits because now they produce more,

making more profit. Concurrently, to produce more they will need more workers, so it creates

more jobs in their economy. Consumers are also better off, consuming more variety of wine

at lower prices. Besides, world efficiency improves because now Q1Q2 is being produced by

more efficient Australian producers. However, domestic producers are worse off because

their production reduces to 0Q1 bringing them less profit. This also means that unemployment

rises in the economy since some local producers will have to close their businesses, and

therefore, the Chinese government is also worse off because they have to deal with higher

unemployment and moreover, the tax revenue they used to collect from those businesses

vanishes.


       This practice is considered illegal because it gives an unfair advantage to Australian

producers. Therefore, to protect the domestic industry and avoid unemployment, China’s

Commerce Ministry has chosen to impose really high protective tariffs on Australian wine.

The potential effect of this tariff is shown below:




                                                                                      | Page 6
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323




      Before the tariff imposition, 0Q4 of wine was being demanded and supplied at PA+Subsidy,

where 0Q1 was domestically supplied and Q1Q4 was imported. After “... a year-long

investigation …”, a tariff of 212% (worst-case-scenario) is imposed on imports, resulting in

extra cost to Australian producers. Hence, imports fall from Q1Q4→Q2Q3, and domestic

supply increases from 0Q1→0Q2. As a result, the price of wine increases from

PA+subsidy→PA+tariff, and quantity supplied/demanded falls from 0Q4→0Q3. The government

receives the tax revenue of a shaded (green) rectangular area; and additionally, there occur

deadweight losses (loss of economic efficiency) because of the shift of production from more

efficient Australian producers to less efficient domestic producers ( ◢ ) and a fall in overall

consumption ( ◣ ).


      The biggest winners are domestic producers, who increase their production up to 0Q2

making more profit. The Chinese government also wins because they gain huge tariff

revenues, which then can be spent on balancing the current account or on other economic

                                                                                       | Page 7
                                                                        Candidate code: jdk323


sectors. The worst is for Australian producers because they lose their market share in China -

a market “... accounting for 39% ...” of Australia’s wine exports, according to the article.

Undeniably, this results in huge revenue losses and more unemployment in the Australian

economy. Consumers are also worse off because they must pay higher prices, and there are

fewer varieties of wine available in the market. Lastly, the fact that Australian producers can

produce at cheaper prices might be simply because of their comparative advantage, which

means they can produce at lower opportunity costs than their competitors. And if so, the tariff

imposed will lead to misallocation of world resources, because now part of the production

will be supplied by less efficient Chinese producers.


      Additionally, as the 4th highlighted paragraph states, China has targeted several other

Australian products apart from wine. Hence, in the long run, China can expect retaliation

policies from Australia, which might lead to a trade war between the two.


      To conclude, this tariff might help the Chinese economy protect its domestic industry,

create more employment, gain huge tariff revenues and balance its current account in the

short run; however, they must consider that Australia in its turn might react by imposing

protectionist policies against China affecting its long-term economy, which might outweigh

the current benefits.




Reference to Article:

BBC NEWS (2020). China slaps up to 200% tariffs on Australian wine. BBC News. [online]

27 Nov. Available at: https://www.bbc.com/news/business-55097100 [Accessed 23 Mar.

2021].




                                                                                       | Page 8
