18/20 points
  Level 7
 HL Essay
                       IB ENGLISH LANGUAGE AND LITERATURE HIGHER LEVEL ESSAY



      How does Nike help break the stereotypes of racial and gender prejudice by representing the

      success stories of athletes in its ​Dream Crazy ​Advertisement campaign while promoting its

      brand image?



               Nike is an American multinational sportswear brand known for its social campaigns that

      break the stereotypical norms present in society. In September 2018, Nike introduced its ​Dream

      Crazy ​advertisement campaign with prominent sports personalities such as Colin Kapernick, Leo

      Baker, Serena Willaims and others who dreamt and achieved their unconventional goals. By

      including successful celebrities, Nike celebrates their stories and endorses diversity by breaking

      the gender and racial prejudices in sports advertisements. Moreover, through this campaign,

      Nike attracts the communities associated and inspired by these athletes and their goals; thus,

      drawing them towards the brand. This essay analyses the advertising choices like the

      multi-modal approach and persuasive techniques such as celebrity endorsement, testimonials,

      and documentary photography used by Nike to promote its brand image and celebrate these

      athletes' success stories by breaking the prejudices.




                                                                                                1
       Figure 1 - Colin Kapernick Nike Dream crazy Advert




       Image found on Nike News website

       In this campaign's first advertisement (Figure 1), Nike showcases the controversial

former National Football League (NFL) player, Colin Kapernick, to celebrate his actions against

police brutality and attract consumers associated with him by breaking racial prejudices. Colin

protested against police brutality towards African Americans by taking a knee during the

national anthem in 2016. As a result, various controversies followed, leading him to be

suspended permanently from the NFL (New York Times, 2016). Colin's face is the

advertisement's primary content, where the audience's attention falls at his gaze. A gaze that

signifies confidence and courage to stand up against the discrimination faced by African

Americans and fight against police brutality. The quote in the centre of the advert, "Believe in

something. Even if it means sacrificing everything", signifies Collins' journey and encourages the

audience to break racial prejudices even if there is a severe sacrifice. The quote acts as a

testimonial expressing Collin's journey and his struggles, and Nike uses it in the advert campaign



                                                                                          2
to promote the idea of taking risks to break societal wrongs. Nevertheless, by blending Colin's

rough hair in the background, which symbolises his African ethnicity, Nike inspires the African

American audience to stand up in unity with Kaepernick and Nike to fight the oppression they

face. Nike uses Colin as an athlete activist from the fourth wave of black activism in America

(University of Massachusetts, 2017) to support the demand for minorities' equal racial rights

and connect capitalism by representing itself as a supporting brand for them; moreover,

attracting consumers from such minorities and people against social prejudices.



       Figure 2 - Leo Baker Nike Dream crazy Advert




       Image found on Nike News website

       Another advertisement (Figure 2) showcases a prominent American skateboarder, Leo

Baker, to celebrate his journey of overcoming stereotypical gender prejudices in skateboarding

and attract people from LGBTQ+ communities. The central part of the advert includes the

quote, "You don't have to change who you are to change the world.", Using the pronoun 'You',

Leo is making a direct connection with the audience by suggesting that they are a part of the

community and their actions will help the society to break the prejudices set against the


                                                                                       3
LGBTQ+ communities; hence, directing them to support his actions. This further acts as a

testimonial for the LGBTQ+ communities to pursue their dreams, and embrace their identity,

disregarding the stereotypes present in sports and society. The advert uses diagonal lines, which

in photography suggests action, tension, and movement, that Leo's involvement seen in the

sport. Uniquely, he created tension in society by being the first non-binary person to openly

challenge the 'males' of society in a 'male' stereotypically associated sport. Through this, he has

also started a movement in society to put his community's voice to fight and openly accept

themselves. Leo's frame seems to be jumping over the fence, suggesting that he has already

overcome some prejudices present in society. In contrast, the placement of the bridge over Leo

suggests that Leo is trying to reach the bridge's height, thus implying that there is a long way to

go ahead. However, the first step has been taken and now the others need to follow him. By

showing the wide-open sky and Leo trying to fly with his hands wide open like a free bird, the

low angle shot further endorses the idea that the sky is the limit. However, the LGBTQ+

community can reach it and overcome stereotypical ideas related to gender in society. The shot

also captures him wearing Nike sneakers, which again promotes Nike's ideology supporting the

people who break these social norms. Through this advert, Nike is also promoting its

street-wear fashion attire by showcasing him wearing sweatpants, sweatshirts, and a cap that

attracts consumers through celebrity endorsement. It again proves itself a unique brand that

accepts and is open to consumers from all different gender backgrounds, which additionally

helps Nike with its marketing (Breant Lang, 2020).

       Figure 3 - Serena Willams Nike Dream crazy Advert




                                                                                          4
       Image found on Nike News website

       Similarly, in one advertisement (Figure 3), Nike showcases Serena Williams's success in

overcoming racial and gender stereotypes and prejudices in her career. Serena Williams is an

African American woman tennis player who faced discrimination to a great extent due to her

racial identity and gender. She started her career in her city, Compton in California, a town with

a large African American population assumed to be a threatening population due to street gang

violence, thus degrading all of Compton's citizens (CNBC, 2020). The quote, "Girls from

Campton, don't play tennis. They own it.", alludes to her identity and message from her journey,

breaking the stereotypical norms which she faced. The quote's first sentence, "The Girls... don't

play tennis", sets a negative tone by not giving a higher authority to Compton's girls, the city

where this exceptional athlete belongs. However, the next sentence, "they own it," indicates the

power of girls from Compton by providing the message in the structure of the rule of three and

making it more persuasive for the audience. Nike also helped her put across her perspective on

society's barriers to individual career choices associated with racial and gender identity.


                                                                                          5
Additionally, documentary photography showcases her playing tennis, which adds a visual

representation of the quote. The camera angle captures the moment of her serve, and her style,

which indicates her power as her serve, is one of the strongest and fastest in the world and the

idea that she owns it(Business Insider, 2019). It also indicates her individuality irrespective of

her gender or racial associations. The light on her face and the Nike logo on her athlete attire

help capture the audience's attention towards her and the brand logo. Moreover, representing

the Nike logo on Serena's apparel presents her association and partnership with the brand as an

empowered African American woman (CNBC, 2019). Using Serena as one of the African

American female celebrities, Nike uses feminism (Katie Martell, 2019) and the fourth wave of

black activism in advertising to reach out to its female and wider millennial audience to build its

brand image.

       The title of the campaign itself, 'Dream Crazy!', is associated with the adverts. They

showcase the stories of those athletes who have pushed themselves against the social

boundaries for their dreams. Nike is addressing the experiences of those athletes belonging to

the American popular - culture, which aims to target the audience from America. The audience

will associate themselves directly with these athletes, as Nike uses celebrity endorsement to

build credibility among the audience and promote their brand image through these athletes.

Overall, making the layout of the larger body of work consists of athletes' image in the

background with their quote in the foreground and the Nike slogan 'Just do it!' at the bottom.

The slogan blends in with the quotations of athletes, acting as a glittering generality as its

association with the quotes creates an optimistic mood for the audience and generates a

powerful effect on them; thus, making them believe in the brand's vision. Further, the slogan




                                                                                          6
evokes strong emotion and directs the audience to follow their dreams, adding subtle support

to promote their brand image. The adverts consist of a monochromatic filter with the quotes in

a white font where the colour scheme signifies the authority and power; athletes overcoming

their problems and legacy. Moreover, the white font on the dark background also brings out the

quote to the audience.

       To conclude, Nike has used strategic marketing strategies such as racial activism,

feminism, and support for the rights of minorities to promote its brand image. They have used

celebrity endorsement, testimonials, and documentary photography to endorse their support

and attract consumers from these communities to encourage the advert campaign. Besides,

making the athletes wear Nike sportswear creates a bandwagon effect on the audience, which

helps Nike sell their products. By showcasing these athletes from various backgrounds, Nike is

also fulfilling its social responsibility of treating people from different genders, races, ethical

grounds, and circumstances, which adds to an ethos to persuade the audience, contributing to

building their brand image. '​The Dream Crazy' ​advertisement campaign created Nike's brand

image as its content showcases the society's transformation of social norms associated with

sports, which makes the audience believe that Nike is a brand that adopts today's social

perspective.



       Word Count- ​1491 words




Works Cited

Hoffman, Benjamin, and Talya Minsberg. “The Deafening Silence of Colin Kaepernick.” ​The
      New York Times​, 4 September 2018,
                                                                                          7
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/04/sports/colin-kaepernick-nfl-anthem-kneeling.ht ml.
        Accessed 4 January 2021.


The University of Massachusetts Amherst. “Harry Edwards: Framing a Century of Black
      Athlete Activism.” ​Isenberg School of Management​, 3 April 2017,
      https://www.isenberg.umass.edu/news/harry-edwards-framing-century-black-athlete
      - activism. Accessed 26 January 2021.


Lang, Brent. “LGBTQ Inclusive Movies, TV Shows, Ads Promote Acceptance, Help
       Brands (Study).” ​Variety​, 27 May 2020,
https://variety.com/2020/film/news/lgbtq-ads-movies-tv-study-glaad-1234617107/.
       Accessed 26 January 2021.


Nike. “Always Against the Grain.” ​The Future is in the Air: Leo Baker​, Nike, 2018,
       https://www.nike.com/my/air-max/leo-baker. Accessed 17 November
       2020.

AULETTA, TYLER. “Serena Williams delivers an inspiring message in Nike's follow-up to its
      controversial Colin Kaepernick commercial.” ​Business Insider​, 25 February 2019,
      https://www.businessinsider.in/Serena-Williams-delivers-an-inspiring-message-in-Nike
      s
      -follow-up-to-its-controversial-Colin-Kaepernick-commercial/articleshow/68158942.cm
      s . Accessed 18 November 2020.

Martell, Katie. “THE NEW RULES OF USING FEMINISM IN MARKETING.” ​Chief Marketer​, 7
January 2019, https://www.chiefmarketer.com/new-rules-using-feminism-marketing/.
Accessed 28 January 2021.


Wu, Jasmine. “RETAIL Serena Williams on what she’s learned from working with Nike.”
       CNBC​, 24 September 2019,
https://www.cnbc.com/2019/09/24/serena-williams-on-what-shes-learned-from-worki
       ng-with-nike.html#:~:text=For%20years%2C%20she%20has%20been%20a%20Nike%2D
       s
       ponsored%20athlete.&text=Earlier%20Tuesday%2C%20speaking%20on%20an,sold%20
       e xclusively%20on%20her%20webs. Accessed 17 November 2020.




                                                                                       8
Figure credits


Figure 1


Nike news Dream Crazy​. 2018, ​Nike​,
https://news.nike.com/content/a-crazy-dream-becomes-reality-when-​you-just-do-
it-posters. Date accessed 1 March 2021




Figure 2


Nike news Dream Crazy​. 2018, ​Nike​,
https://news.nike.com/content/a-crazy-dream-becomes-reality-when-​you-just-do-
it-posters. Date accessed 1 March 2021


Figure 3


Nike news Dream Crazy​. 2018, ​Nike​,
https://news.nike.com/content/a-crazy-dream-becomes-reality-when-​you-just-do-
it-posters. Date accessed 1 March 2021




                                                                                 9
