         The theme of resentment in Carol Ann Duffy´s poetry

 Research question: To what extent can the poems “Mrs. Lazarus” and
“Eurydice”, from the 1999 anthology “The World´s Wife”, be considered
                      explorations of resentment?


              Subject: English A Literature Higher Level
                      Essay word count: 3770
                  Candidate number: 001007-0007
                    Supervisor: Ms. Funk Christie




                                                                  Page | 1
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction........................................................................................................................................3
Main Body..........................................................................................................................................4
Literary Analysis..................................................................................................................................6
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................................ 15
Bibliography...................................................................................................................................... 16




                                                                                                                                         Page | 2
                                        Introduction

The emotion of resentment is explored in a great number of poems found in Carol Ann Duffy´s

1999 poetry anthology “The World´s Wife”, a collection that involves the retelling of biblical

and mythical stories, as well as historical events, from a female perspective. Two poems, in

particular, that focus on the emotion of resentment, are “Mrs. Lazarus” and “Eurydice”. “Mrs.

Lazarus” revolves around the fictional wife of Lazarus, who according to the biblical story was

resurrected, and her reaction to his death and unexpected resurrection. Similarly, “Eurydice”

also revolves around a resurrection, as the poet presents a reworked version of the classical

myth “Orpheus and Eurydice”, as recounted by Eurydice. In both poems, an exploration of

resentment allows Duffy to portray a range of emotional responses, which arise from the various

constraining circumstances the speakers are confronted with in a patriarchal society. In “Mrs.

Lazarus” the poet illustrates how resentment arises from the death of Lazarus itself, but is

intensified through the unexpected resurrection which follows. Not only is the enormous

suffering Mrs. Lazarus endured nullified, but Mrs. Lazarus also finds herself forced to reassume

the position of wife to the now horrifically transformed Lazarus, abandoning her new

relationship, after a brief period of emotional liberation. The introduction of a resentful female

character into the reworked story allows Carol Ann Duffy to develop an alternative perspective

on the revered miracle. Similarly, in “Eurydice”, the poet constructs a new frame of reference

which explores resentment, illustrating Eurydice´s resentment regarding her objectification by

the vain and absurd Orpheus, his intrusive attempt at resurrecting her, and her subordinated

position as his wife, typist, and unwilling muse. As the emotion of resentment is a central theme

within both poems, the question: “To what extent can the poems “Mrs. Lazarus and “Eurydice”,

from the 1999 anthology “The World´s Wife”, be considered explorations of resentment?” is

worthy of investigation.



                                                                                          Page | 3
The scope of the research undertaken includes an in-depth analysis of both poems, with a

particular focus on literary devices, and research on Carol Ann Duffy´s work, specifically

regarding the anthology “The World´s Wife”. In addition, definitions of the emotion of

resentment and its multifaceted structure have been researched and integrated into the work.


                                                  Main Body

Carol Ann Duffy, the current Poet Laureate of the United Kingdom, is well known for giving

women a voice within her poems, as is the case in her 1999 poetry Anthology “The World’s

Wife”. Elizabeth O´Reilly states in her article concerning the poet: “her work is highly

acclaimed for being both literary and accessible, and she is regarded as one of Britain’s most

well-loved and successful contemporary poets.”1. Duffy creates a unique perspective regarding

classical myths, biblical stories, and history, by portraying the feelings and opinions of women,

using parts of the original tales and events, as well as creating versions of women whom she

imagines being involved in them. Carol Ann Duffy´s poems contain messages about the

position of women - such as the unfavorable situations women face in society due to their

gender -, which are relevant to the struggles women face nowadays. The poet uses direct address

to captivate the readers and emphasize the relevancy of the poem´s meaning. “The World’s

Wife” is an anthology in which the emotion of resentment is central to the stories of the women

presented and can be considered a major concern of the poet. According to the sociologist

Warren D. TenHouten, resentment can be described as “arising out of powerlessness…neither

forgotten nor forgiven”2. He is of the opinion that individuals of subdominant groups are prone


1
    Elizabeth O´Reilly, “Carol Ann Duffy”, British Council Literature, accessed September 30, 2020,

https://literature.britishcouncil.org/writer/carol-ann-duffy.


2
    Warren D. TenHouten, “From Ressentiment to Resentment as a Tertiary Emotion”, Review of European

Studies 10, no. 4 (2018): 49.


                                                                                                      Page | 4
to feel resentful towards those treating them unfairly3. Women, who have been treated

unequally to men for centuries, have been subject to various detrimental experiences, which

have led to resentment over time. Within the anthology “The World´s Wife”, the poet explores

how such predicaments create resentment, as she examines the plight women find themselves

in due to societal expectations, and because of their relationships to men in a male-dominated

world. Both “Mrs. Lazarus” and “Eurydice” focus on the concept of being denied the

opportunity to move on from the past and to exercise free will as a woman. Additionally,

TenHouten describes resentment as a tertiary emotion, consisting of various secondary

emotions such as contempt, shock, and outrage, which themselves are compounded primary

emotions4. Its connection to an array of emotions enables authors to express it in multiple ways,

exploring the circumstances as well as the arising emotions which lead to resentment. This

composes Duffy´s focus, as she presents how the inescapable circumstances the women in the

poems “Eurydice” and “Mrs. Lazarus” find themselves in, result in emotions ranging from

anger and grief to feelings of confinement, which ultimately constitute the resentment felt by

the speakers of the poems. In “Mrs. Lazarus” and “Eurydice”, literary techniques such as

metaphors which capture the strength of the women’s emotions, alliteration, syntax and tone,

although more one of bewilderment, and sadness in “Mrs. Lazarus”, and outrage and sarcasm

in “Eurydice”, are used to portray the emotions of the women. Furthermore, “Mrs. Lazarus”

and “Eurydice” relate on a conceptual level, as in both circumstances women find themselves

in detrimental situations due to a resurrection.




3
    TenHouten, “From Ressentiment to Resentment as a Tertiary Emotion”, 50.


4
    TenHouten, “From Ressentiment to Resentment as a Tertiary Emotion”, 49.



                                                                                         Page | 5
                                           Literary Analysis

In “Mrs. Lazarus”, Carol Ann Duffy reworks the gospel story of the resurrection of Lazarus 5

The original New Testament story recounts Lazarus being resurrected by Jesus four days after

having died6. There is no mention of a wife in the original biblical story, Lazarus’s sisters being

the only female figures presented7. In the narrative created by Carol Ann Duffy Mrs. Lazarus

suffers greatly due to her husband´s death, and goes through a lengthy grieving process,

portrayed in the first four stanzas of the poem, which finally allows her to heal and begin a new

phase of life. Her brief period of happiness is then destroyed by the brutal resurrection of

Lazarus who is in an appalling condition.


There is a tone of desperation and helplessness throughout the poem, highlighting Mrs. Lazarus´

grief and conveying her resentment that death has stolen her husband, as she “retched/his name

over and over again, dead, dead”8. The diction chosen expresses the speaker´s feeling of revolt

concerning Lazarus´ death, and repetition serves to create a tone of desperation, reflecting the

speaker´s feelings. Duffy further accentuates the suffering caused by the death of Lazarus as

Mrs. Lazarus explains that she “had wept for a night and a day”9. The syntax used here, whereby

the poet reverses the saying of “a day and a night”, emphasizes the metaphorical darkness

entrenching Mrs. Lazarus, arising from her profound feelings of grief. A tricolon and

onomatopoeia are also employed by the poet to emphasize Mrs. Lazarus' despair as she


5
    “John 11, NIV”, Bible Gateway, accessed October 14,

2020, https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John%2011&version=NIV.


6
    Bible Gateway, “John 11, NIV”.
7
    Bible Gateway, “John 11 NIV”.
8
    Carol Ann Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, in The World´s Wife, (London: Picador,2017),49-50, lines 4-5.
9
    Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 1.


                                                                                                     Page | 6
“howled, shrieked, clawed”10 at her late husband’s gravestone. The chosen verbs reflect her

animalistic reaction to his death and create a highly distressed tone. Through the intense focus

on Mrs. Lazarus’ grief, the readers´ understanding of her resentment at the close of the poem is

facilitated, as her suffering seems to have been in vain. Furthermore, Mrs. Lazarus´ journey into

grief is also illustrated through the imagery Duffy uses. The powerful metaphor, whereby Mrs.

Lazarus informs the readers that she “learnt/ the stations of Bereavement, the icon of [her] face/

in each bleak frame”11, is an allusion to the stations of the cross; Mrs. Lazarus superimposes

her face on the icons which depict Jesus´ journey to his crucifixion, illustrating the climax of

her suffering and her resentment of death itself. It is thus all the more catastrophic for Mrs.

Lazarus when an appalling version of her husband is resurrected.


Lazarus´ deplorable condition, which awakens feelings of disgust and horror, contributes to the

resentment Mrs. Lazarus has towards the resurrection, as she is forced to become his wife again,

rendering her helpless. Lazarus is described as “disheveled”12, “moist”13, and wearing “his

rotting shroud”14. The diction conveys his degenerated and repellent condition, creating a tone

of disgust. Olfactory imagery further stresses the repulsive and anomalous nature of the

resurrection, from the speaker´s perspective, as Mrs. Lazarus “breathed/ his stench” 15.

Moreover, Lazarus himself is “croaking”16. This word implies that Lazarus has been brought

back as a non-human creature, and the use of onomatopoeia, which creates an unpleasant sound,



10
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 3.
11
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus” lines 11-13.
12
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus” line 39
13
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 39.
14
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus” line 38.
15
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus” lines 37-38.
16
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus” line 40.

                                                                                          Page | 7
further underlines his degraded almost animalistic condition. Contrary to a miracle supposedly

signifying rebirth and life, the visual and sensory imagery creates a juxtaposing effect

combining death with uncleanliness, which further delineates the absolute horror of Mrs.

Lazarus’ dilemma in the closing stanza, when she faces the newly resurrected Lazarus.

Furthermore, Duffy portrays Mrs. Lazarus´ instant shift into the enforced role of Lazarus´ wife

after his resurrection in the last stanza through referring to Lazarus as “cuckold”17, rendering

Mrs. Lazarus as guilty of having committed adultery, although she was technically a widow.

Therefore, what is considered an amazing miracle in the biblical story is reworked into a horrific

scenario whereby Mrs. Lazarus is portrayed as the resentful victim of an unnatural event which

deprives her of freedom.

Considering the intense feelings of loneliness Mrs. Lazarus has to endure during her period of

grieving, her resentment regarding Lazarus´ death is also made clear, as she is suddenly

deprived of a husband and sexual partner. Her loss of identity as his wife, following Lazarus´

death, is intertwined with her arising loneliness. She describes sleeping “in a single cot”18 as a

“widow”19, “one empty glove”20, and a “white femur/ in the dust, half.” 21. The multitude of

powerful images depict singularity and loneliness, as they portray fragmented versions of

objects which are usually paired. Additionally, Mrs. Lazarus attempts to regain her sense of self

as she “shuffled in a dead man´s shoes”22. Here, sibilance accentuates the painful sound of a

widow attempting to find comfort by moving around slowly in her dead husband’s shoes. The




17
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 40.
18
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 6.
19
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 7.
20
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus” line 7.
21
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, lines 7-8.
22
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 8.

                                                                                          Page | 8
speaker´s loss of a sexual partner is also depicted, as she perceives herself as a “nun in a mirror,

touching herself.”23. Mrs. Lazarus metaphorically identifying with a nun, suggests that a life

of celibacy is all that she can imagine, or will be allowed to have as a widow. Additionally, the

juxtaposition of a religious element with a sexual image depicts her religious noncompliance,

and desire to fulfil her sexual needs which she is prohibited from doing. Thus, the readers learn

that Mrs. Lazarus finds herself in a constraining situation, in which amidst her suffering she is

unable to act according to her own needs.

After a period of great suffering, the sixth stanza marks a turning point in the poem, as the

peaceful tone conveys Mrs. Lazarus´ brief moments of happiness with a new lover. The initial

four stanzas focusing on the grieving process Mrs. Lazarus goes through precede a strong

statement at the beginning of the fifth stanza regarding the end of the period of intense grief,

“[t]hen he was gone.”24. The finality of this short sentence leads into the passage of a newfound

life for Mrs. Lazarus. The tone of finality also functions to put an end to that of desperation and

suffering in the previous stanzas. In the context of the poem, this can be viewed as Mrs. Lazarus

liberating herself, escaping the emotional confinement which Lazarus´ death brought upon her.

Consequently, the speaker finally embarks on a new relationship, recounting “the shock/ of a

man´s strength under the sleeve of his coat”25, when she is out walking with her new love. She

is quick to mention that she has dedicated herself to properly mourning her husband, and

thereafter describes being “healed, able/ to watch the moon occur to the sky”26. This metaphor

creates a moving image which symbolizes a new beginning. However, the short-lived

experience of peacefulness, characterized by the serene tone, is intercepted by a menacing one,



23
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 11.
24
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 21.
25
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, lines 22-23.
26
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 28.

                                                                                           Page | 9
as Lazarus has been resurrected, the speaker being forced to confront this event, with people

“bearing [her] / into the hot tang of the crowd”27. Mrs. Lazarus experiences helplessness, linked

to a sense of resentment, as she is carried off by a mob, and physically forced in the direction

of Lazarus. To a similar effect, the “sly light/ on the blacksmith´s face” 28 as well as the “shrill

eye of the barmaid”29 are described. Both images evoke a sensation of danger, creating a

menacing tone which briefly foreshadows the horrific revelation about to happen. Additionally,

the word “shrill” suggests a screeching sound implying hysteria, further underlining the

distressing situation the speaker is unwillingly faced with.

The two poems “Mrs. Lazarus” and “Eurydice”, although based on stories with different

contexts, both portray the marginalization of women and their subordinated relationships to

men. “Eurydice” is based on the Greek mythological tale of Orpheus, who visits the underworld

in hopes of resurrecting his dead wife30. In the original tale, Orpheus´ desire to resurrect

Eurydice is his great love for her31. Charming the gods with his artistic talents, he is allowed to

bring Eurydice back to the land of the living on the condition of not looking back at her until

they have left the underworld32. Nothing, in this mythological tale, is mentioned of Eurydice´s

feelings about being brought back to the land of the living. As Mary Louisa Lum states:

“Negation of the opinions of the female is represented in “Eurydice”. Orpheus goes to the

underworld to get his wife back and during the negotiations, no one asks Eurydice if she wants




27
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, lines 34-35.
28
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, lines 32-33.
29
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 33.
30
     “Orpheus and Eurydice”, History Today, accessed 30 September,2020,

https://www.historytoday.com/archive/foundation/orpheus-and-eurydice.
31
     History Today, “Orpheus and Eurydice”.
32
     History Today, “Orpheus and Eurydice”.

                                                                                          Page | 10
to return to live.”33. However, Carol Ann Duffy reinvents the event, taking a female-based slant,

as her poem focuses on the reaction of Eurydice. In contrast to “Mrs. Lazarus”, a more assertive

tone is used, as the speaker´s resentment is characterized through feelings of anger and

frustration, rather than the helpless suffering evident in “Mrs. Lazarus”.

Eurydice has finally found her peace in the underworld, as this is where she can remain safe

from the persistent Orpheus. However, her happiness is short-lived as he arrives to claim her.

Eurydice, content to be in the underworld, states: “It suited me down to the ground.”34. Her

happiness is expressed through humorous irony, as she literally finds herself in the ground,

namely the Greek underworld. Additionally, she finds the underworld to be “the one place

you´d think a girl would be safe”35. This ironic and colloquial statement, directly addressed to

the reader and typical of Duffy’s style, indicates that the underworld, usually characterized as

a place of suffering, is Eurydice’s haven, where she is protected from what she describes as

“the kind of man/ who follows her round”36. The description of Orpheus depicts him as

oppressive and obsessive, suggesting that Eurydice had no respite from him. Additionally, the

use of colloquial language creates an appeal to the modern reader concerning issues that are

relevant to women in today´s society, such as being subject to harassment and not being allowed

to be independent, both circumstances which result in resentment and anger. Eurydice´s

happiness is obstructed, as she hears “a familiar knock-knock at Death´s door”37, which

ironically alludes to the saying of “knocking at death´s door”, marking Orpheus´ arrival. The




33
     Mary Louisa Lum, “Herstory: Feminizing Historical Narratives in Carol Ann Duffy´s the World´s

Wife”, International Journal of Language and Literature 7, no. 1(2019): 18.
34
     Carol Ann Duffy, “Eurydice”, in The World´s Wife, (London: Picador, 2017), 58-62, line 10.
35
     Duffy, “Eurydice” line 16.
36
     Duffy, “Eurydice” lines 17-18.
37
     Duffy, “Eurydice” line 28.

                                                                                                     Page | 11
onomatopoeic effect of the knocking, which is slow and drawn out, by use of the hyphen, creates

a sense of dread linked to resentment, particularly when Eurydice mentions the familiarity of

the foreboding knock.

The sensation that Eurydice is left little choice once she hears the knock is suggested by her

lack of identity when alive, matter which contributes to the resentment surrounding Orpheus´

intrusion. Even in death Eurydice´s autonomy is constrained as she must unwillingly return to

her overbearing husband. In Mrs. Lazarus, lack of choice also causes a mood of intense

resentment. This can be seen in the description of the “hot tang of the crowd”38, which carries

Mrs. Lazarus towards her zombie-like husband, causing suffocating sensations. Eurydice´s

depersonalization is illustrated as she explains that Orpheus, in his poetry, described her as

“Dearest, Beloved, Dark Lady, White Goddess/etc., etc.”39. The listing of the capitalized pseudo

titles enforced onto Eurydice creates a bitter and resentful tone, as her inability to have her own

identity is conveyed. Through the repetition of “etc.” at the end of the statement, the poet further

highlights the overpowering loss of identity Eurydice faced, suggesting a dreadful, entrapping

situation. Moreover, the juxtaposing titles “Dark Lady” and “White Goddess” indicate that

Orpheus assigned Eurydice a title according to the context of his poems, and that she is merely

instrumentalized for the purpose of his poetry. Eurydice makes it clear that she would rather

“speak for [her]self”40. This assertive statement sums up the source of Eurydice’s resentment,

as she was reduced to the titles attributed to her by her husband, her voice, and her right to

autonomy being stolen by him. Thus, the portrayal of the tumultuous past life Eurydice is now

being forced to return to contextualizes her resentment as Orpheus attempts to resurrect her.




38
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 35.
39
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, lines 49-50.
40
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 48.

                                                                                          Page | 12
Eurydice´s resentment at being followed to the underworld is additionally underpinned by her

criticism of Orpheus´ vain, absurd, and childish character. The tone of the poem is one of

sarcasm and scorn, whereby Orpheus is regarded as childish and unable to accept the slightest

criticism. She describes how the poet, “once sulked for a day and a night”41, because of a remark

she made concerning his use of too many abstract nouns. The word “sulked” reveals Eurydice´s

criticism concerning Orpheus’ childishness. Carol Ann Duffy as a result portrays a childish man

being mocked by an outraged woman through the used diction. The poet also makes use of

hyperbole to illustrate the extent of Orpheus’ absurdity, when Eurydice, in the third stanza, lists

the numerous ridiculous claims Orpheus made about himself and his work. It is stated in the

blurb found on his poetry work: “that animals, / aardvark to zebra, / flocked to his side when he

sang”42. Orpheus´ attempt to present himself as a mystical figure is simply met with disdain

from Eurydice. In addition, the personification of the rocks at his feet, who before his apparition

were “sullen”43 and “mute” 44, whose description symbolizes Eurydice´s subordinate position

in relation to her husband, are said to have “wept wee, silver tears”45 after Orpheus´ apparition.

Thus, Duffy once again utilizes hyperbole in order to create a scornful tone which reflects

Eurydice´s resentment. Thereafter the reader is informed that Eurydice was Orpheus´ typist and

is aware that the claims being made are actually “[b]ollocks.”46. The chosen colloquial word

sharply contrasts with the exaggerated language used for the preposterous claims about

Orpheus, conveying Eurydice´s opposition towards him whilst heightening her frustration and

resentment that he has come to claim her. In a similar manner, Mrs. Lazarus is also claimed by


41
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 23.
42
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, lines 38-40.
43
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 43.
44
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 43.
45
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 44.
46
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 45.

                                                                                         Page | 13
her husband once he is resurrected and forced into subordination. This is shown through the

description of Lazarus “croaking his cuckold name”47 which infers Mrs. Lazarus has committed

adultery, in the eyes of the community, through the bizarre circumstances.

Eurydice’s lack of identity and inevitable instrumentalization are moreover expressed in the

third and eleventh stanzas of the poem where she reveals that she “must follow him back to our

life, / Eurydice, Orpheus´ wife”48 . The personal pronouns chosen indicate no separation

between his life and hers, illustrating the loss of individuality Eurydice experiences.

Additionally, the speaker refers to her name, for the first and only time in the poem, only in

conjunction with her role as a wife, which she must now unquestionably reassume if she is

resurrected. In “Mrs. Lazarus”, the speaker’s loss of individuality comes as a result of the death

of her husband. Both women are trapped, but Eurydice is “trapped in his images, metaphors,

similes, / octaves and sextets, quatrains and couplets, / elegies, limericks, villanelles, / histories,

myths...”49. The extensive list of literary devices and literary forms expresses Eurydice´s

frustration, and implicitly resentment, whilst creating a suffocating effect which reflects her

confining situation. Through the ellipsis at the end of the statement the entrapping nature of

Eurydice´s life is further highlighted, as the poet suggests that Eurydice was subjected, in a

metaphorical sense, to being trapped in numerous other literary forms and devices as Orpheus´

unwilling muse. Furthermore, the objectification forced upon Eurydice by Orpheus, for the

purpose of his poetry is also illustrated as she describes him as having come with “a poem to

pitch with [her] as the prize”50. Orpheus’ motives are selfish, attempting to regain access to his

muse, the diction implying the dehumanization of Eurydice. Additionally, the harsh and spitting



47
     Duffy, “Mrs. Lazarus”, line 40.
48
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 63.
49
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, lines 64-67.
50
     Duffy, “Eurydice”, line 33.

                                                                                             Page | 14
sound created by the use of alliteration makes Eurydice’s resentment towards Orpheus heard

by the reader.


                                         Conclusion
The focal point of the poems “Mrs. Lazarus” and “Eurydice” by Carol Ann Duffy, most

prominently highlighted through imagery, tone and diction, is the emotion of resentment. Duffy

explores Mrs. Lazarus´ resentment initially arising due to the loss of her husband and the

emotional suffering she is confronted with. Though the main source of resentment is that due

to Lazarus´ unnatural resurrection her intense suffering has resulted to have been in vain, she is

put in the position of having committed adultery and is forced to abandon her new relationship,

after a brief period of happiness, and reassume the role of wife the now repugnant Lazarus.

Whilst in “Mrs. Lazarus” the emotion of resentment is explored through grief and horror, in

“Eurydice” the resentful tone is one arising from frustration. The poet shows the reader that

resentment can lead to feelings of disdain and a forceful revelation of the truth concerning the

way a man has objectified and misrepresented a woman. Eurydice resents her childish, selfish

and self-absorbed husband, who merely instrumentalizes her for his poetry and denies her the

right to her own identity. Her resentment is subsequently heightened as Orpheus intrusively

attempts to resurrect her, for his own selfish motives, without giving any regard to the fact that

Eurydice was especially happy to be in his absence in the underworld. Through giving the

reader a glimpse of the happiness that was theirs in the absence of their husbands, but that both

women were robbed of, the poet further contextualizes the resentment felt by both speakers of

the poems. Moreover, subordination and resentment have a clear connection in both poems as

the women do not have the right to autonomy. Therefore, in answer to the question: “To what

extent can the poems “Mrs. Lazarus” and “Eurydice” be considered an exploration of

resentment?” it can be stated that both poems are an in-depth and extensive exploration of the

emotion of resentment.

                                                                                        Page | 15
                                        Bibliography

Duffy, A. Carol. “Mrs. Lazarus”. In The World´s Wife, 49-50. London: Picador: 2017.

Duffy, A. Carol. “Eurydice”. In The World´s Wife, 58-62. London: Picador: 2017.

Lum, M. Louisa. “Herstory: Feminizing Historical Narratives in Carol Ann Duffy´s the

World´s Wife”. International Journal of Language and Literature 7, no. 1(2019): 18-23.

O´Reilly Elizabeth. “Carol Ann Duffy”. British Council Literature. Accessed September 30,

2020. https://literature.britishcouncil.org/writer/carol-ann-duffy.

TenHouten, D. Warren. “From Ressentiment to Resentment as a Tertiary Emotion.” Review of

European Studies 10, no. 4 (2018): 49-64.

“Orpheus and Eurydice”. History Today. Accessed September 30, 2020.

https://www.historytoday.com/archive/foundation/orpheus-and-eurydice.

“John 11, NIV”. Bible Gateway. Accessed October 14, 2020.

https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=John%2011&version=NIV




                                                                                   Page | 16
