              English A: Language and Literature (HL)

                   Written Task 2 - Critical Essay

Prescribed question: How and why is a social group been portrayed a
                           certain way?




              Number of words in the task: 978 words
Outline

      Prescribed question: How and why is a social group represented in a
particular way?

     Title of the text for analysis: ‘I Am a Bisexual Cuban-American Woman & I
Am So Proud of it’ by Lauren Jauregui

      The part of the course to which the task refers: ​Part 1 - Language in
      cultural context

        Thesis statement: Minorities are empowered when we speak openly about
their struggles, and the text uses certain diction, tone, and other stylistic devices
to persuade the audience about their importance.

      Key points:
   1. Swearing is used to catch the audience off-guard, providing memorability
      to her arguments, and understand the struggles women have in
      comparison to men.
   2. Complex diction portrays the author as well-versed in the topics she wants
      to discuss, and also expresses the relevance and gravity of feminism.
   3. The author uses an argumentative tone to serve as a platform to discuss
      these social issues from her own experience, providing a voice for women
      who have had different experiences from her.
   4. Both positively and negatively-charged words were used to highlight the
      outcomes of political correctness, how it has helped validate the identities
      of minorities.
   5. The text’s context is derived from America, and why America divided by
      partisanship affects how minorities are portrayed in American culture. But
      by addressing it as simply an invasion of fundamental human rights,
      Jauregui affirms and empowers the identities of several minorities.
Prescribed question: How and why is a social group represented in a particular
way?


       After being outed on Twitter through photos of her kissing another girl,
Lauren Jauregui, a Cuban-American singer, officially came out as bisexual
through a letter addressed to Trump supporters. The letter depicted several
reasons why supporting Trump was the same as siding with corrupt morals,
values, and beliefs. The letter portrays a meaningful message through her
delivery, addressing the importance of people in minorities, due to how
overlooked they are. This critical essay will examine how stylistic devices were
used to portray women while taking in the context of the author’s background
and how it affects this portrayal.


       The main focus of this essay will be how Jauregui portrays women and the
idea of feminism. In order to understand how cultural context affects the
portrayal of minorities, it is necessary to show a brief outline of theories that
comprise them. In feminist theory, one core belief is the idea that the world is
patriarchal, a male-leaning society and it is inevitable that women be
neglected. Feminism argues for a system that emphasizes the equality between
both sexes, and in a way overthrows the idea of a male-dominated world.
However, Jauregui connects feminism with other social issues such as LGBT rights
and racial conflict. This is another part of feminism called intersectional feminism,
which acknowledges that all women have multi-layered facets that they have
to deal with. Feminism does not only cover the rights of women but also how
other identities can create much more stigma and cause unique tones of
discrimination.


       First, Jauregui establishes credibility as an author by stating the formal
definitions of words used in feminist theory: “sexist… homophobic...”.
Furthermore, in the context of Jauregui’s background, someone who is part of
several minorities, being Latina, bisexual, and a woman. Her background shows
that she is more than capable of understanding the different meanings of each
word and how it applies to minorities. Minorities, specifically, are groups that are
overlooked and often discriminated based on a certain attribute. Her usage of
negatively-charged words shows the hardships faced by women and other
minorities caused by discrimination. Alongside this is her use of swearing: “bitch”
and “asshole.” The use of the word “bitch” conveys her frustration that women
are not respected in the same way men would be, emphasizing the core ideal
of feminism, the wish of equality between the sexes. As quoted: “...I will gladly
take the label of bitch and problematic for speaking my mind the same any
way any man would be admired and respected for doing.” Her use of swearing
not only portrays a strong emotional feeling, but the custom of it being ‘taboo’
also catches the audience off-guard and thus makes her arguments more
convincing and memorable.


      The argumentative tone employed by Jauregui comes in as she explains
the importance of politically correct language in making minorities feel heard,
how it has slowed down racist language, expressed feminism as a fundamental
right for women’s validity to be treated as the beings they are, and created
numerous labels to assist queer people who felt invalid and invisible. Again,
these sentences employ some of the stylistic devices discussed before;
formally-phrased words and negatively charged diction, asserting the negative
consequences. This further highlights what should be taken action in order to
affirm the importance of minorities in providing a much more open and inviting
America.


      The letter ensures silenced minorities are heard while also establishing a
convincing and compelling argument against the voters who defend a
president who, in her words: ‘spoke to the parts of you that think you are superior
to the rest of us.’ The purpose of the letter is also expressed through her tone,
especially as she begins to talk about how even as a part of several minorities,
she still has privilege due to her skin color. “I have experienced the privilege
those genes have granted me, and I am grateful and will continue to speak on
behalf of women around the world who do not experience a fraction of that
respect because of the color of their skin or what they choose to wear...” In this
sentence, Jauregui portrays women as people who have differing identities,
experiences that even lead to unique shades of discrimination. The word
“grateful and will continue to speak on behalf of women...” suggests solidarity
between Jauregui and other women, an example of ensuring that their voices
are heard through her own communications. The use of certain words such as
‘proud,’ ‘strength,’ and ‘resilience’ also lend to conveying messages of self-love
for one’s self, despite sexuality, gender, or other issues that people may look
down upon.


      It is also critical to address the context of America because this is where
the text derives its arguments. It is also where its claims and points will be
employed, against extreme right-wingers, Trump supporters. Like most countries,
America is a country divided by partisanship, and Trump’s values align with a
conservative view. In comparison, Jauregui views it as an invasion of rights, not
through a partisan lens, a Democratic point of view, as shown in her last lines of
the letter, where she states: “...We are screaming battle cries against those
whose political and personal agendas threaten our lives and sanity.” This shows
that because of America’s interest in political advantage, a more aggressive
view is needed in order to protect fundamental human rights.
      Overall, this shows a clear context of an America that is divided by
partisanship, affecting how minorities are portrayed in American culture,
considering the current sphere of politics, and how it calls for a more radical
view of feminism. In conclusion, Jauregui’s letter portrays how women have
different experiences and identities which may bar them from accessing certain
privileges. Jauregui’s letter also portrays the struggles of being a woman in order
to decrease stigma around that specific minority and give women a platform to
be heard.
Word Count: 978 words


Bibliography:


Feminist Theory - an overview | ScienceDirect Topics. (2014). Retrieved
November 11, 2019, from Sciencedirect.com website:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/social-sciences/feminist-theory


Jauregui, L. M. (2016, November 18). Fifth Harmony's Lauren Jauregui Pens Open
Letter to Donald Trump Voters: 'I Am a Bisexual Cuban-American Woman & I Am
So Proud of It'. Retrieved from
https://www.billboard.com/articles/columns/pop/7581388/fifth-harmony-lauren-j
auregui-open-letter-donald-trump-voters
