The Unequal Effect of Commercial Gentrification on
 Micro-Businesses in the London Borough of Tower
                      Hamlets




                        1
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                              3

2 Research Methods                                                                          7
  2.1 Determining the scope of the investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
  2.2 Data collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     9

3 Analysis                                                                                 13
  3.1 H1 : Perception of gentrification in regards to proximity of CBD . . . . . .         13
  3.2 H2 : Perception of gentrification in regards to business age . . . . . . . . .       17
  3.3 H3 : Perception of gentrification in regards to adaptation . . . . . . . . . .       21

4 Conclusion                                                                               24

5 Evaluation                                                                               25

A Appendix                                                                                 27
  A.1 Background Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       27
  A.2 Calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   28
      A.2.1 Hypothesis 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       28
      A.2.2 Hypothesis 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       29
      A.2.3 Hypothesis 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       30




                                             2
1     Introduction

The aim of this research investigation is to determine whether micro businesses in the
London Borough (LB) of Tower Hamlets are affected equally by commercial gentrifica-
ton, and if not, to what extent. The investigation links to option G of the IB Geography
syllabus: Urban Environments. Specifically, ”Urbanization, natural increase and cen-
tripetal population movements, including rural–urban migration in industrializing cities,
and inner city gentrification in postindustrial cities”.
    Commercial gentrification is ”a revitalisation process in which the agents of change
are not new middle class residents, but new spaces and services aimed at attracting
them” (Agustı́n Cócola Gant, 2015). Micro businesses refer to all businesses that meet
the criterion of 10 or less employees and with 2 or less locations that are all located in
Tower Hamlets. The research question for this investigation is defined as ”To what extent
does commercial gentrification affect micro-businesses in the London Borough of Tower
Hamlets equally?”.
    Tower Hamlets (TH) is a Borough (henceforth abbreviated to LB) located in London,
UK. 57% of those living in Tower Hamlets are employed, the LB experiences an ume-
ployment rate of 6.7% (Tower Hamlets Council, 2015). From 1990, Tower Hamlets has
seen economic growth, with 200 thousand jobs being available, resulting in 3 jobs being
available for every 2 residents (Tower Hamlets Council, 2010). Nonetheless, the median
income in TH is £30 thousand, compared to the £45 thousand in the City of London
(Tower Hamlets Council, 2019).
    Simultaneously, 42% of the population lives in social housing, a number higher than
the London average (New Policy Institute, 2016). In 2014, 10 outright orders to repossess
property are executed by TH landlords per 1000 renting, though only 5 of these ended


                                              3
in eviction (New Policy Institute, 2016). These orders to repossess are rising; 2003 saw
approximately 300 repossession orders, whereas 2015 saw a threefold increase of approxi-
mately 900 (New Policy Institute, 2016).
   88.6% of the enterprises in 2013 employed less than 10 people, making microbusi-
nesses the majority of commercial activity (Tower Hamlets Council, 2013b). In the same
year, 27.8% of businesses were younger than two years, 25% being older than ten years
(Tower Hamlets Council, 2013a). 2012 saw an enterprise birth rate of 17.4% compared
to the death rate of 12.3%, suggesting an increase in business numbers. Businesses are
experiencing rent increases, such as railway arch shops in the south of the LB (White,
2019).




                                           4
           Figure 1: The area of the LB of Tower Hamlets, shown in yellow


   Within the LB, research was conducted in predefined research areas, shown in figure
2. These are located within Spitalfields, Weavers, Shadwell, Stepney Green, St. Peter’s,
St. Dunstan’s, Limehouse, Mile End, Poplar, Lansbury, Bromley (both), Bow (both).




                                           5
              Figure 2: Areas marked in purple are the research areas


   H1 states that businesses closer to the City of London/CBD percieve gen-
trification more positively than other areas.
   H2 states that newer businesses are impacted more negatively than older
ones.
   H3 states that there is a positive correlation between businesses that have
adapted their products and services and their perception of changes.




                                        6
2     Research Methods

2.1    Determining the scope of the investigation

Firstly, a basic definition of micro businesses was determined, and the research question
was finalized. With this definition in mind, Tower Hamlets was explored using Google
Maps. High mobile phone usage areas (Google Areas of Interest) suggest there is commer-
cial activity going on in these areas. For example, business phone calls being made and
data usage (as opposed to WiFi in homes). These areas were then traced onto a custom
Google Map.
    These areas were then traversed on Google StreetView to determine their land use.
Any non-commercial areas were not applicable to the research question, and as such,
an absence of commercial land caused the area to be rejected. With this process, the
final research quadrants/research areas were established (abreviated as RQs), which were
later grouped together to form sectors (RS), as seen in figure 2. This was to effectively
distribute fieldwork between peers, as well as to enable analysis between various regions.




                                            7
      (a) Areas of high mobile phone usage on Google MyMaps




                                  8

(b) Research quadrants (purple) within their respective sectors (blue)

             Figure 3: Determining the research area
   In order to obtain the population size all the research quadrants were again traversed
on Google Maps/StreetView. The result of this was then put into a spreadsheet, where
the count in quadrants were summed up to represent their sectors. As such, a hybrid
technique of random sampling as well as specific areas was used. This is portrayed in
table 1. In Tower Hamlets, all research areas were traversed yet again and businesses re-
counted, which yielded up to date sums also found in table 1. As such, with a confidence
ratio of 95% the target sample size was calculated to be 365 businesses.

        Sector   SV pop. size SV sample size          RL pop. size RL sample size
         NE          217           67                     164            61
          E          60            37                     16             14
         SE          111           52                     114            52
         SW          193           64                     229            68
          W          598           83                     744            86
          C          86            46                     63             38
         NW         N/A           N/A                     88             46
        Total       1256           349                   1418           365

      Table 1: Sample sizes per sector: Google StreetView (SV) and in person (RL)



2.2    Data collection

Data was collected using the Esri Survey123 application, on mobile phones. All surveyors
were split up into groups of two and then assigned to research areas, so that RQs could be
surveyed concurrently. These would then conduct the questionnaire presented in figures
4-6 to the businesses.
   A total of 341 responses were recorded, which is 24 below the required sample size
for a 95% confidence level. Not every respondent addressed every question, such that for
individual questions the sample size is even lower.




                                            9
                                                                                                     10
Figure 4: Data collection questionnaire (1/3); justification in red, further information in purple
                                                                                                     11
Figure 5: Data collection questionnaire (2/3); justification in red, further information in purple
                                                                                                     12
Figure 6: Data collection questionnaire (3/3); justification in red, further information in purple
3     Analysis

3.1    H1 : Perception of gentrification in regards to proximity of

       CBD

The CBD of London is, as aforementioned, located in the City of London, as well as part
of Canary Wharf, TH. Using these two areas, two CBD points can be defined within it,
henceforth identified by alpha, and beta. Alpha is located at 30 St. Mary Axe, City of
London, also known as the Gherkin, a place of strong commercial activity. This area is
also very close to TH, which is why it serves as a good reference point. Beta is located in
Cabot Square, Canary Wharf, an area of land also close to the RQs and within commercial
land usage and a high income area (Tower Hamlets Council, 2019).




      Figure 7: Locations of points alpha and beta, in relation to the RQs (purple)

                                            13
   Distance values are the displacement between the coordinates of the CBDs and every
business (curvature is neglegible). Only regarding the smaller of these two, these could
be categorized into distance groups (A - G), with the criteria being in table 2.

   Category From (coord. units, inclusive) To (coord. units, exclusive) Members
      A                  0                            0.005               11
      B                0.005                          0.01                40
      C                 0.01                          0.015               0
      E                0.015                          0.02                69
      E                 0.02                          0.025               49
      F                0.025                          0.03                74
      G                 0.03                          0.035               35

                            Table 2: CBD distance categories


   Calculating the average perception for the respective categories yields the data shown
in figure 8. Whilst the bar chart cannot graph trendlines, it is still clear that there is no
proportional relationship between the proximity of the CBD and the perception. The chi
squared test shows that only at a confidence level of 90% it can be said that there is a
correlation between the distance and perception (see appendix A.2.1).




                                             14
Figure 8: Distance category vs. average gentrification perception




                               15
               Figure 9: Gentrification perception by research quadrant


   Figure 9 shows the perception of gentrificaiton by quadrant. Especially the businesses
northwest, near the City of London CBD, percieve this gentrification more positively.
This could be due to the higher disposable income of those working in the City of London
(Tower Hamlets Council, 2019). However, as aforementioned, there is no clear trend
between the location and the distances to the City of London, or even Canary Wharf.
   Summarising, the hypothesis H1 is invalid; whilst there are significant differences, no
proportionality can be found. Micro businesses do not experience gentrification equally;
those near Shoreditch experience it more positively.




                                           16
3.2    H2 : Perception of gentrification in regards to business age

There are various primary source indicators that can be used in order to determine the
impact of gentrification in regards to age. As the business birth rate exceeds the death
rate, perceptions of new businesses can show the ease of business within the area. For
one, the wellbeing of the business was provided by the survey respondents. As well as
that, more implicit factors like a change in customer base can indicate business wellbeing.
   In the survey, the age was not explicitly asked for, but an estimate within certain
brackets. When assigning positive change a numerical value of 1, negative change a value
of -1, and neutral a value of 0, the average of these represents the average perception of
gentrification within a certain age bracket. Using the midpoint of each age group, this
can be show in a graph in figure 10.




         Figure 10: Median age of business vs average gentrification perception


                                            17
   This shows that the newest businesses percieve the gentrification more negatively than
those of 2 to 4 years of age. Businesses older than this percieve it more negatively again.
Due to there being no midpoint in the last category - the range extends infinitely, it was
not plotted. At a confidence level of 95% using chi squared it can be said that there
is a statistical relationship between the age of the businesses and their perception of
gentrification (see appendix A.2.2).




               Figure 11: Prominence of business ages in Tower Hamlets


   Figure 11 shows the clusters of businesses between 2 and 4 years, where survival is
easier (Tower Hamlets Council, 2013a).
   As aforementioned, a change in customers can also indicate a change in wellbeing.
In the scope of this investigation, the time period for a change was defined as 2 years.
Similarly to overall perception, assigning the value 1 to an increase, -1 to a decrease and
0 to no change, this can be graphed. Again, the age on the X axis in figure 12 refers to


                                            18
the midpoint of the respective bracket.




           Figure 12: Median age of business vs average change in customers


   The younger the business, the more they perceive an increase in customers. Particu-
larly businesses of age 5 to 10 years are impacted significantly. The percentage of change
to the previous point is most significant here. At a confidence level of 99% it can be said
that there is a statistical relationship between the business age and change in customers
(see appendix A.2.2).
   Figure 13 shows the data from figure 9 as well as a clustered change in customers.




                                            19
          Figure 13: Change in customers + positive gentrification perception


   Referring to figure 13, there are some correlations between the two factors. Increases
of customers tend to be in areas with more positive ratings. Statistically speaking, there
is a 100% corrolation between the two (see appendix A.2.2). Particularly in the west of
Tower Hamlets, near Shoreditch, the concentration of positive ratings as well as increase
in customer numbers becomes apparent. Overall, older stores are disadvantaged and
impacted more negatively by commercial gentrification.




                                           20
3.3    H3 : Perception of gentrification in regards to adaptation

With gentrification, affluent individuals will seek to engage with micro businesses within
the area. As the demographic changes, the demands will also change, especially due to
more disposable income. As a result, store owners many needs to change their products,
in order to comply with their changing client base. Failing to do so will result a fall of
revenue, and a decreasing business wellbeing.




       Figure 14: Number of businesses that changed their offerings by category


   Figure 14 shows the number of businesses that have changed their services or offers due
to a change in demand, by category. Statistically, there is a correlation between the type
and whether or not a change was implemented (see appendix A.2.3). The most prominent
change can be found within the bought products (physical objects that do not fit into the
other categories) and food businesses. This is due to two factors: the demand to change,


                                           21
as well as the ability to change. Businesses such as dentists or lawyers are most likely
going to provide the same offerings regardless of the current demographic. However, this
is not the case for more income elastic products, such as consumables. Secondly, certain
business types are able to adapt to changes easier. A store is able to change the products
that are being sold easily; this is not as easy for service orientated businesses.




                      Figure 15: Location of different business types


   The clustered location of business types are represented in figure 15. Bought products
are the prominent type, however there are food services located in the north and south
east.
   Moreover, there is a strong correlation (chi squared, 95% confidence level) between
the perception of gentrification and a change in offerings. More specifically, those that


                                             22
adapted their goods/services perceive gentrification as a more positive thing. This is
shown in figure 16.




         Figure 16: Positive gentrification perception and a change in products


   Referring to figure 16, the most prominent correlation is the approx. 0.3 ratio and
high concentration of change. This correlation is statistically correct at a confidence level
of 95% (see appendix A.2.3). Conclusively, the businesses that adopted new products
were impacted more positively than those that did not.




                                             23
4     Conclusion

H1 Hypothesised that the businesses closer to the CBD percieved gentrification more
positively. This hypothesis is not true. Whilst distance to the CBD and perception are
correlated, there is no linear, proportional or inversely proportional relationship between,
resulting in the hypothesis being rejected. Generally, businesses near Shoreditch percieved
this gentrification more positively.
    H2 Hypothesised that newer businesses are impacted more negatively than older ones.
The inverse of this was found. With the exception of businesses 2 to 4 years of age, the
older the business, the more negative their perception of gentrification. This is supported
by the inversely proportional relationship between age of business and customer numbers
- the older the store, the less the average customer increase.
    H3 Hypothesised that there is a positive correlation between businesses that have
adapted their products and services and their perception of changes. This hypothesis is
supported. Businesses that indicated they changed their offerings, statistically, also rate
their perception of gentrification higher. This is partly due to the prominence of bought
product businesses, which can change their supply relatively easily to meet new consumer
demands.
    Answering the main research question, commercial gentrification does not affect micro
businesses equally within Tower Hamlets. One discriminating factor is age, with younger
businesses being affected more positively than older ones. Moreover, businesses that are
willing and have the ability to adjust their services to a change in demographics are
advantageous. Finally, a closer proximity to affluent areas such as Shoreditch also yields
a more positive impact of commercial gentrification on the businesses.




                                            24
5     Evaluation

The questionnaire was designed particularly well as it enabled the quantification of quali-
tative data by having a significant amount of multiple choice questions. The sampling and
area selection was also a strength - with the phone useage and StreetView we were able
to effectively determine areas with large population sizes, allowing our time to be used
effectively. Due to the digital nature of the collection process, a lot of human error (such
as mistakes in copying coordinates) could be mitigated, resulting in a high reliability.
    On the contrary, the sample size was flawed in two ways. Firstly, the sample size was
calculating by using the population size of each sector, rather than research quadrant. This
was done to reduce the sample size to make an investigation possible within a timeframe,
but may have affected the credibility of the responses. Secondly, the sample size was not
met - 24 responses were lacking. As such, the validity of the data suffered.
    Even within this sample size, there were various outliers that had to be rejected for
not meeting the criteria, reducing the number further. Moreover, many responses did not
address all questions, such that the sample size for treating this data was also not met.
Furthermore, as many respondents were personally negatively affected by commercial
gentrification, responses may contain negative biases, limiting objectivity.
    The data collection process was rather inefficient at times, a way to flag stores to return
to them later, rather than keeping track of them manually, would be an improvement.
Moreover, many businesses were willing to answer the survey but unable to due to time;
so more thorough timeplans would be a further imporvement.
    For further research, the scope of the investigation could be narrowed. The current
investigation focused on many different factors to allow for a multitude of hypotheses;
however narrowing this down could yield more targeted and in-depth research. Possi-


                                              25
ble exploration could be done in the different impacts of commercial gentrification on
demographics, changes in business attitudes, etc.




                                           26
A     Appendix

A.1   Background Information




Figure 17: Median household income in Tower Hamlets (Tower Hamlets Council, 2019)




                                       27
A.2     Calculations

A.2.1    Hypothesis 1




Figure 18: Chi squared statistical test on distance category vs. perception of gentrification




                                             28
A.2.2   Hypothesis 2




Figure 19: Chi squared statistical test on age of business vs. perception of gentrification




   Figure 20: Chi squared statistical test on age of business vs. change in customers




                                            29
Figure 21: Chi squared statistical test on change in customers vs. perception of gentrifi-
cation


A.2.3   Hypothesis 3




   Figure 22: Chi squared statistical test on type of business vs. change in products




                                           30
Figure 23: Chi squared statistical test on change in products vs. perception of gentrifica-
tion




                                            31
References

Agustı́n Cócola Gant (2015). “Tourism and commercial gentrification”. In: RC21 Inter-
   national Conference. url: https://www.rc21.org/en/wp-content/uploads/2014/
   12/E4-C%C3%B3cola-Gant.pdf.
New Policy Institute (2016). Demography and deprivation in Southwark and Tower Ham-
   lets. url: https://www.npi.org.uk/files/6614/7316/1332/Demography_and_
   deprivation_in_Southwark_and_Tower_Hamlets.pdf.
Tower Hamlets Council (2010). Local Economic Assessment 2010 Fact Sheet Volume 2:
   Economy and Enterprise. url: https://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/Documents/
   Economic-development/13094-LEA-Fact-sheet-Vol-2jm-v3.pdf.
— (2013a). Business Demography - Birth, Death and Survival of Businesses in Tower
   Hamlets. url: https://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/Documents/Borough_statistics/
   Economy_and_businesses/Research-Briefing-TH-Business-Demography-2013-
   10.pdf.
— (2013b). Tower Hamlets Business Structure - Size, Turnover and Age. url: https:
   / / www . towerhamlets . gov . uk / Documents / Borough _ statistics / Economy _ and _
   businesses/Research-Briefing-TH-Business-Structure-2013-11.pdf.
— (2015). Unemployment and ethnicity: 2011 Census factsheet 2015-05. url: https :
   / / www . towerhamlets . gov . uk / Documents / Borough _ statistics / Census _ 2011 /
   2015_06_11_Unemployment_and_ethnicity_Census_factsheet_draft.pdf.
— (2019). Household Income. url: https://www.towerhamlets.gov.uk/Documents/
   Borough_statistics/Income_poverty_and_welfare/income_2019_l.pdf.
White, Tom (2019). “Railway arch shops face eviction after rent rises of up to 85%”. In:
   The Guardian.


                                           32
