Why is the enforcement of laws protecting the LGBT
        minority in Brazil so problematic?




               Figure 1: Photo of the Public Debate


                   Word Count: 1994
        The LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual) minority in Brazil is one of the
most opressed groups in Brazilian society, regularly suffering from violent attacks. Over
380 LGBT people were assassinated in Brazil in 2017 alone, and over 440 were
involved in violent deaths during that same year, more than 3 times the number from the
year 2000.1 The transexual population in Brazil is especially vulnerable, as employment
is incredibly limited, and around 90% of the transexual population is essentially forced
into prostitution.2 Clearly for many LGBT people in Brazil, several basic human rights
are not respected, including the right to work and the right to live in dignity, both of
which are included in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.3 Some legislation
does exist which protects the LGBT population, both on a state and federal level. For
example, the state of São Paulo has the law number 10.948,4 which punishes people for
discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. Recently in June of 2019,
the Supreme Federal Tribunal (STF) of Brazil ruled to criminalize homophobia.5 Despite
the existence of laws which codify the human rights of LGBT people, the enforcement of
these laws is still incredibly problematic. Many activists and members of the LGBT
community see the lack of enforcement of their human rights as one of the biggest
political issues facing Brazil, and emphasize the importance of finding a way to make
these laws enforceable. Some highlight the importance of strong institutions, while
others place importance on an approach based in civil society and education. With that


1
  Morais, Pâmela, and Danniel Figueiredo. “LGBTfobia No Brasil: Fatos, Números e Polêmicas.” ​Politize!​,
Politize!, 28 June 2019, www.politize.com.br/lgbtfobia-brasil-fatos-numeros-polemicas/. Accessed on
January 19th, 2020
2
  Cunha, Thaís. “Transexuais São Excluídos Do Mercado De Trabalho.” ​Correio Braziliense​, Correio
Braziliense, 28 Dec. 2016,
especiais.correiobraziliense.com.br/transexuais-sao-excluidos-do-mercado-de-trabalho. Accessed on
December 21st, 2019
3
  UN General Assembly, ​Universal Declaration of Human Rights​, 10 December 1948, 217 A (III), available
at: https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3712c.html [accessed 29th January 2020]
4
  Assembleia Legislativa do Estado de São Paulo, ​Lei 10.948, ​5th of November 2001, available at:
https://www.al.sp.gov.br/repositorio/legislacao/lei/2001/lei-10948-05.11.2001.html​, Accessed on August
31st, 2019
5
  Oliveira, Mariana, and Luiz Felipe Bárbieri. “STF Permite Criminalização Da Homofobia e Da
Transfobia.” ​G1​, Globo , 13 June 2019,
g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2019/06/13/stf-permite-criminalizacao-da-homofobia-e-da-transfobia.ghtml.
Accessed on December 21st, 2019
in mind, ​why is the enforcement of laws protecting the LGBT minority in Brazil so
problematic? For this internal assessment, the political issue that I will be focusing on
is the enforcement of the human rights of the LGBT population in Brazil.


       Laws protecting the LGBT minority in Brazil already exist, although they are
considered weak due to their lack of enforcement, and this in turn, diminishes the
legitimacy of these laws for many people. The existence of these laws are a relatively
recent development. Historically, the LGBT population would usually be excluded from
human rights laws in Brazil. The first law which specifically protected the LGBT
population was passed in the year 2001, however that law only applied to the state of
São Paulo, and suffered from a lack of enforcement, as seen by the regular violence
and discrimination suffered by the LGBT population. According to Renato Simões, one
of the main authors of the original law, the São Paulo state government did an
exceptionally poor job in promoting this law, which affected enforcement as many
people, including police and educators, were unaware of the law's existence. For a law
to be effectively enforceable, there must be widespread awareness of the law's
existence, a strong independent judicial system, as well as an autonomous and active
police force. It is clear that these conditions were not met at the time, and it is
questionable whether they can be met now. Only in 2019 was a federal law passed.
Notably, this law was passed by the Supreme Federal Tribunal of Brazil instead of the
Congress or Senate.6 The members of the tribunal criticized the legislative branch for its
inaction, further stating that it should be the role of the Brazilian legislature to pass such
laws.7 This shows the relative strength of the Brazilian Judicial branch of power, as the
judicial branch can still function independently when the legislative and executive
branches fail.




6
  Coletta, Ricardo Della. “STF Conclui Julgamento e Enquadra Homofobia Na Lei Dos Crimes De
Racismo.” ​Folha De S.Paulo​, Folha De S.Paulo, 13 June 2019,
www1.folha.uol.com.br/cotidiano/2019/06/stf-conclui-julgamento-e-enquadra-homofobia-na-lei-dos-crimes
-de-racismo.shtml. Accessed on November 19th, 2019
7
  Ibid
          It is too early to determine whether or not the recently passed law will be
effective. On the one hand, historically, most state laws protecting the LGBT population
have been highly ineffective, mainly due to a general lack of knowledge of the laws'
existence. On the other hand, if the law is federal, this may give it more legitimacy in the
eyes of Brazilian citizens. That being said, the explicitly homofobic rhetoric of Brazilian
president Jair Bolsonaro emboldens homofobia throughout the country. According to
[redacted], there has been a notable rise in homofobic discourse since the 2018
elections, and many LGBT people have been feeling increasingly afraid.




          One way that I engaged with my political issue was by attending a public debate
held at the Legislative Assembly for the State of São Paulo, where several politicians,
including Renato Simões and congresswoman Professora Bebel, as well as many
LGBT activists discussed the current and future state of LGBT laws in Brazil. By
attending this debate, I gained insight on the main issues facing the LGBT population,
as well as the way in which different groups respond to this. Additionally, I observed an
example of politicization of human rights, as one of the attendees was running for the
city council in a small nearby city, and the way he spoke made it seem as if he was
campaigning in order to try and win votes. For my second engagement activity, I
interviewed an activist and diversity consultant named [redacted], who is heavily
involved with several LGBT organizations. He highlighted the importance of activism in
the promotion and monitoring of human rights, as well as the issue of intersectionality
within LGBT activism. Intersectionality describes the “intersection between different (...)
axes of oppression, such as gender, sexuality, class, and race”,8 and this is important
because some LGBT people suffer more homofobia and oppression if they are poor or
black. LGBT people who are white, educated, and more reserved about their sexuality,
are usually more accepted by society, and their economic and social rights are more
widely respected. From this interview, I learned about several social movements, most


8
    [redacted]. “Corpo Livre. Body and Art as Means of Activism in Brazil”. N. p., 2017, page 10 Web.
notably the Revolta da Lampada (Lamps revolt). The Lamps Revolt is named after a
homofobic attack which took place in São Paulo in 2010, where several attackers beat
several people using fluorescent lamps. The lamp became a notable symbol. [redacted]
writes that “The collective’s name was not only inspired by that singular episode, but
because the lamp had become a symbol of oppression, a homophobic reminder to
LGBT and other deviant bodies should stay inside their closets.”9 This movement uses
art and performance in protests in order to spread its message.


       To protect human rights nationally, strong institutions are needed, as well as
active and independent judicial, executive, and legislative branches of government.10
Weak institutions means that a state's ability to monitor and protect human rights is
weakened, making human rights laws seem less legitimate. The importance of the
promotion of human rights was highlighted by my engagement activities, with [redacted]
saying that education is the ideal way of promoting human rights, which in turn, leads to
human rights laws having increased effectiveness. If the state cannot effectively enforce
human rights laws, civil society can step in. Civil society already has an important role in
promoting human rights, as seen by the activism of the Lamps Revolt group. Civil
society and NGOs also do significant work in monitoring human rights. For example, the
“Grupo Gay da Bahia” (Gay Group of Bahia) does significant work in monitoring
violence againts the LGBT population in Brazil, and their reports are often cited by many
larger organizations.11 While it is clear that NGOs and civil society can strengthen
human rights laws, whether or not they should be involved in enforcing laws is more
controversial. Enforcing laws often means punishing violations, and when non-state
actors do this, it often means vigilante justice, which can be counterproductive in
enforcing human rights. This relates to the idea of a state monopoly on violence.



9
  Ibid, page 12
10
   “The Role of States.” ​Icelandic Human Rights Centre​,
www.humanrights.is/en/human-rights-education-project/human-rights-concepts-ideas-and-fora/human-rig
hts-actors/the-role-of-states. Accessed on February 4th, 2020
11
    Michels, Eduardo, et al. ​População LGBT Morta No Brasil​. 2018, pp. 1–25, ​População LGBT Morta No
Brasil​.
Originally theorized by Max Weber, the idea behind this is that the state is the only
political actor with the right to use physical force.12 If NGOs could enforce human rights,
this would violate the states monopoly on the use of violence. Clearly stronger
institutions are needed, however this seems unlikely to happen under Bolsonaro’s
government. The current minister of women, the family and human rights, Damares
Alves, was a formal evangelical pastor who famously encouraged boys to wear blue
and girls to wear pink.13 Despite the very real and notable impact of NGOs, the role of
enforcing human rights has to go to the state, and the inaction on the part of the
Brazilian government, along with its explicit homofobia, means that discrimination and
homofobic violence will likely worsen. Promotion and monitoring on the part of NGOs
might have been enough if homofobia was not as rampant in Brazilian society, as one
study by the University of São Paulo showed that around 25% of Brazilians self identify
as homofobic, with this being partly attributed to religious reasons.14 Overall, it becomes
clear that civil society and NGOs are incredibly important for the promotion and
monitoring of LGBT rights in Brazil, however for enforcement of the existing laws to be
effective, the state will have to step in and take a more active approach, which clearly
will not happen in the current administration.




        Some limitations exist to my engagement activities. Both reiterated the
importance of passing legislation protecting LGBT people, and I could have included
some counterviews. Some more extreme libertarians argue that anti-discrimination laws
weaken freedom of speech. However, it is worth mentioning that anti-discrimination
laws, such as the one passed by the state of São Paulo in 2001, deal more with
discriminatory actions, such as in employment and education, and thus, do not


12
   Munro, André. “State Monopoly on Violence.” ​Encyclopædia Britannica​, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc.,
6 Mar. 2013, www.britannica.com/topic/state-monopoly-on-violence. Accessed on March 10th , 2020
13
   Cordeiro, Felipe. “Relembre as Polêmicas Da Ministra Damares Alves.” ​Terra​, Terra, 26 Dec. 2019,
www.terra.com.br/noticias/brasil/cidades/relembre-as-polemicas-da-ministra-damares-alves,e39919c669f
1a41d9bdc48ec93b867c21a7urtnq.html. Accessed on January 28th, 2020
14
    Menezes, Caroline Dias. “Um a Cada Quatro Brasileiros é Homofóbico.” ​AUN USP​, Universidade De
São Paulo, 2013, usp.br/aun/antigo/exibir?id=5195&ed=919&f=1. Accessed on March 1st, 2020
necessarily upfront freedom of speech.15 Still, including more varied perspectives would
have strengthened my engagement activity. Another limitation is the fact that many of
the people speaking in the public debate were current or former politicians, who might
politicize their support for LGBT rights, which was the case with one of the attendees. If
the debate had issues with politicization, then that would have diminished the extent to
which I actually engaged with the issue. That being said, while many of the attendees of
the debate were involved in politics, many were not, and the event was very diverse,
with members from all branches of the LGBT community. So even though politicization
was present in the debate, I still experienced a wide variety of perspectives and
viewpoints.


With all of this being said, why is the enforcement of laws protecting the LGBT
minority in Brazil so problematic? The homofobic attitudes displayed by members of
the current administration hinder the enforcement of existing LGBT protection laws
because the government spends less time and effort in promoting the laws, which
means that law enforcement bodies, as well as the public at large, will not be aware of
the existence of any laws, and thus cannot take action to help enforce the law. The
homofobic attitude of the administration also emboldens homofobia, making homofobic
attacks and incidents more common, something that [redacted] mentioned. The
government's homofobia also makes the law less legitimate in the eyes of law
enforcement, who then choose to spend less effort enforcing the law, delegitimizing the
law for many people, almost creating a cycle which leads to a lack of enforcement.
Intersectionality makes enforcement more complicated, as certain members of the
LGBT population who suffer from other kinds of oppression, will have a harder time
having their rights protected. Homofobic attitudes are not exclusive to administration
members. Roughly a quarter of Brazilians self identified as homofobic, and many of




15
   Assembleia Legislativa do Estado de São Paulo, ​Lei 10.948, ​5th of November 2001, available at:
https://www.al.sp.gov.br/repositorio/legislacao/lei/2001/lei-10948-05.11.2001.html​, Accessed on August
31st, 2019
those used religion to justify their homofobia.16 While the focus of this internal
assessment was on the enforcement of laws, it is also worth mentioning the difficulties
with codifying laws protecting the LGBT minority. Politicization of human rights leads to
political deadlock, hampering the government's ability to codify laws against LGBT
discriminitation. As previously mentioned, politicization is clearly present on both sides
of this political issue, which I observed in the public debate, although homofobic
politicization is far more damaging. No singular factor explains the difficulties in
enforcement of LGBT rights laws in Brazil, however it is clear that while these laws are
necessary, for the time being, they will continue to be largely ineffective.




16
  Menezes, Caroline Dias. “Um a Cada Quatro Brasileiros é Homofóbico.” ​AUN USP​, Universidade De
São Paulo, 2013, usp.br/aun/antigo/exibir?id=5195&ed=919&f=1. Accessed on March 1st, 2020
                         Bibliography


● Assembleia Legislativa do Estado de São Paulo, ​Lei 10.948, ​5th of
   November 2001, available at:
   https://www.al.sp.gov.br/repositorio/legislacao/lei/2001/lei-10948-05.11.20
   01.html​, Accessed on August 31st, 2019
● Coletta, Ricardo Della. “STF Conclui Julgamento e Enquadra Homofobia
   Na Lei Dos Crimes De Racismo.” ​Folha De S.Paulo​, Folha De S.Paulo, 13
   June 2019,
   www1.folha.uol.com.br/cotidiano/2019/06/stf-conclui-julgamento-e-enquad
   ra-homofobia-na-lei-dos-crimes-de-racismo.shtml. Accessed on
   November 19th, 2019
● Cordeiro, Felipe. “Relembre as Polêmicas Da Ministra Damares Alves.”
   Terra​, Terra, 26 Dec. 2019,
   www.terra.com.br/noticias/brasil/cidades/relembre-as-polemicas-da-minist
   ra-damares-alves,e39919c669f1a41d9bdc48ec93b867c21a7urtnq.html.
   Accessed on January 28th, 2020
● Cunha, Thaís. “Transexuais São Excluídos Do Mercado De Trabalho.”
   Correio Braziliense​, Correio Braziliense, 28 Dec. 2016,
   especiais.correiobraziliense.com.br/transexuais-sao-excluidos-do-mercad
   o-de-trabalho. Accessed on December 21st, 2019
● [redacted]. “Corpo Livre. Body and Art as Means of Activism in Brazil”. N.
   p., 2017.
● Menezes, Caroline Dias. “Um a Cada Quatro Brasileiros é Homofóbico.”
   AUN USP​, Universidade De São Paulo, 2013,
   usp.br/aun/antigo/exibir?id=5195&ed=919&f=1. Accessed on March 1st,
   2020
● Michels, Eduardo, et al. ​População LGBT Morta No Brasil​. 2018, pp.
   1–25, ​População LGBT Morta No Brasil​.
● Morais, Pâmela, and Danniel Figueiredo. “LGBTfobia No Brasil: Fatos,
   Números e Polêmicas.” ​Politize!​, Politize!, 28 June 2019,
   www.politize.com.br/lgbtfobia-brasil-fatos-numeros-polemicas/. Accessed
   on January 19th, 2020
● Munro, André. “State Monopoly on Violence.” ​Encyclopædia Britannica​,
   Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 6 Mar. 2013,
   www.britannica.com/topic/state-monopoly-on-violence. Accessed on
   March 10th , 2020
● Oliveira, Mariana, and Luiz Felipe Bárbieri. “STF Permite Criminalização
   Da Homofobia e Da Transfobia.” ​G1​, Globo , 13 June 2019,
   g1.globo.com/politica/noticia/2019/06/13/stf-permite-criminalizacao-da-ho
   mofobia-e-da-transfobia.ghtml. Accessed on December 21st, 2019
● “The Role of States.” ​Icelandic Human Rights Centre​,
   www.humanrights.is/en/human-rights-education-project/human-rights-con
   cepts-ideas-and-fora/human-rights-actors/the-role-of-states. Accessed on
   February 4th, 202
● UN General Assembly, ​Universal Declaration of Human Rights​, 10
   December 1948, 217 A (III), available at:
   https://www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3712c.html [accessed 29th January
   2020]
