WHY ARE DIPLOMATIC TACTICS
NOT EFFICACIOUS IN CREATING
POLITICAL CONCURRENCE
BETWEEN TWO STATES WHEN
AN INTERNATIONAL SHARED
RESOURCE IS PRIMARILY
CLAIMED BY A SINGLE STATE?




IB Global Politics - Political Engagement Activity| 1994 words
       The lack of access to clean water is one of the most critical humanitarian issues

facing Africa. With the WHO reporting that only 16% of the sub-Saharan population has

access to sanitary drinking water through a household connection, numerous riparian

African nations neighboring the Nile river have demonstrated an increasing interest in the

management of water resources.1 However, the use of transboundary waters, such as the

Nile, can create “intricate diplomatic challenges… [leaving] states in asymmetric

upstream/downstream relationships, at a time when pressures on the world's water supplies

are increasing substantially.”2 This is evident in the dispute between Egypt and Ethiopia

regarding Ethiopia’s construction of the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD). In

2011, the Ethiopian government announced it's $4.8 billion plan to construct a hydroelectric

dam, capable of generating over 5,000MW of electricity, on the Nile.3 With 83% of

Ethiopians lacking access to continuous electricity, the construction of GERD can be seen

as part of a wider scheme by the Ethiopian government to promote the development of the

country.4 However, the Egyptian government believes that GERD will reduce the amount

of water flowing from the Nile to Egypt. The Nile provides nearly 86% of “Egypt’s

freshwater for agriculture, a major component of the Egyptian economy, along with water

for industrial production and sewage treatment,”5 thus making the Nile “not only … an

economic lifeline but … also … a security issue of the highest order.”6 Although over 85%5 of

the Nile originates from Ethiopia, Egyptian hegemony to the Nile remains; the 1929



                                                                                           1
agreement between Egypt and the United Kingdom, on behalf of Sudan, “declared their

natural and historic rights to water from the Nile.”3 Multilateral diplomatic tactics that

have been utilized in order to resolve this political issue are failing; in 2020 alone Ethiopia

has refused to sign a draft agreement initialled by Egypt while Egypt has rejected Ethiopia’s

proposition to cover the first two years of filling GERD.7 Furthermore, the state of these

diplomatic tactics are confronted by the possibility of both states going to war; in 2016,

former Egyptian president Muhammad Morsi suggested different methods for the

destruction of GERD including supporting the anti-Ethiopian government rebels.8 Thus,

this has prompted me to investigate the following political issue: why are diplomatic tactics

not efficacious in creating political concurrence between two states when an international

shared resource is primarily claimed by a single state? This political issue is one that is

worthy of investigation as it impacts multiple domains of global politics: power, sovereignty,

legitimacy, justice, development, peace, conflict, violence, and non-violence. Furthermore,

through my engagement activities (explained in the forthcoming paragraph), this political

issue will be explored through the following levels of analysis: international, regional, and

national.

       As an Ethiopian citizen, since the announcement of the construction of GERD, I

have been exposed to the patriotic and nationalist ideals present in the daily conversations

between my family members, close friends, and other Ethiopian citizens. From these



                                                                                             2
conversations spanning nearly a decade, the realist beliefs present in the aforementioned

people were more clear; a lot of them were willing to go to war over the dispute with Egypt

regarding the construction of GERD. This immediate jump to war, resembling the concept

of realpolitik, made me wonder if all other diplomatic (i.e peaceful) measures had been

exhausted. Were the diplomatic measures that were implemented not effective? Why? To

explore and ultimately answer such questions and avoid any bias, I interviewed three

Ethiopians and two Egyptians who are cognizant regarding this political issue over Zoom

(due to COVID-19 mitigations) and asked each six to seven open-ended questions to explore

and elaborate on matters as they saw fit. The interviewees provided me with insight

regarding the legalities, alternative solutions, and unique perspectives to this political issue:

Berhanu Tesfaye (Ethiopian), former associate professor of Law at Mekelle University;

Abenezer Worku (Ethiopian), water science researcher based in Bahir Dar, Ethiopia;

Zelalem Abiy (Ethiopian), GERD operator; Karim Elsaadany (Egyptian), hydro-political

analyst; and Mustafa Rashad (Egyptian), political writer on Egyptian affairs.

       During my interview with Mr. Worku, when asked about what he believes is causing

these diplomatic measures to be ineffective, he solely blamed these poor results on Egypt’s

desire to remain the regional hegemony and their stubborn attitude towards any sentiment

that would deprive them of their ‘historic rights’ associated with the Nile.9 Furthermore, he

emphasized that Egypt is acting in such a manner out of fear that Ethiopia will take over



                                                                                               3
as the next regional hegemony9 as it has the fastest growing economy in Africa, averaging

a broad-based growth of 9.8% a year from 2009 to 2019.10 The consequences of such actions

that Mr. Worku suggests that Egypt are pursuing against Ethiopia can be interpreted from

a neo-marxist perspective; when a dominant nation (i.e. Egypt) seeks to control a peripheral

nation (i.e. Ethiopia), “what yields in consequence is the tension to rebel against the

oppressor by dependent states in order to agitate for an equitable and fair share of national

resources.”11 Thus, theoretically speaking, Egypt’s need to remain a hydro-hegemony in this

region will inherently lead to difficulty in resolving this political issue via diplomatic means.

However, it should be noted that Mr. Worku’s aforementioned claims cannot be validated

by any hard evidence, but are just assumptions as to why Egypt is acting in a hostile

manner. Additionally, in my interview with Mr. Tesfaye, when asked the same question as

Mr. Worku, he responded in a similar yet more pragmatic manner; Egypt’s continuous

reference to the 1902 Anglo-Ethiopian treaty as means to stop the operation of GERD has

not allowed for these diplomatic measures to function as intended12, as shown by Egypt’s

response to the 2015 Declaration of Principles on GERD.14 My conversation with Mr.

Tesfaye prompted me to further research this treaty and its validity as a mechanism to stop

the operation of GERD by the Egyptians. This treaty was signed between Great Britain

(representing Sudan) and Emperor Menelik II of Ethiopia in 1902.13 Article three of this

treaty prohibits Ethiopia from exploiting the Nile (i.e. participating in any construction



                                                                                               4
that arrests the flow of the Nile), which is one of the reasons Egypt is against the

construction and operation of GERD. However, it can be argued that this treaty is defective

as it contains a defect of consent, thus making it invalidated by the affected party; Ethiopia

signed this treaty under colonial pressure which could evince psychological coercion.13

Furthermore, as both Great Britain and Ethiopia are known to follow a dualist approach

in validating treaties and the fact “this treaty was never ratified by the British Parliament

or by the Ethiopian Crown Council”, it is not a legally binding document.13 Ultimately,

from my interviews with Mr. Worku and Mr. Tesfaye, I am now further informed of the

theoretical and pragmatic reasons behind why diplomatic tactics, such as the 2015

Declaration of Principles on GERD, are not effective in creating political concurrence

between Ethiopia and Egypt. My discussion with Mr. Tesfaye has exposed me to certain

legalities associated with this political issue and how the Egyptians have illogically utilized

these legalities to stop the operation of GERD.           Furthermore, although based on

assumptions, my interview with Mr. Worku has allowed me to associate neo-marxist theory

to why most diplomatic tactics that are being utilized are inherently destined to be

ineffective.

       Although the Egyptians that I had interviewed (Mr. Elsaadany and Mr. Rashad)

shared a similar stance to their Ethiopian counterparts on how effective a diplomatic

approach to resolve this political issue has been, they both described different reasons as to



                                                                                             5
what has caused diplomacy to fall short. In my interview with Mr. Elsaadany, he emphasised

that one of the main reasons as to why diplomatic approaches such as the 2015

Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)16 have not led to bilateral political concurrence is

due to Ethiopia’s history of conflict over transboundary waters with other riparian nations.15

Mr. Elsaadany is specifically referring to Ethio-Kenyan water conflict in 2011. Ethiopia’s

new dam on the Omo River, Gilgel Gibe III, exacerbated the food security crisis present in

Kenya and Ethiopia, consequently leading to the death of 34 individuals due to conflict

between the Kenyan Turkana tribe and the Ethiopian Dassanech, Nyangatom, and Mursi.17

Although past actions do not determine future actions, they do provide a relative guideline

as to what can occur, hence why Mr. Elsaadany believes that diplomatic measures to solve

this political issue are not and will not be effective due to Ethiopia’s past conflicts over

transboundary waters and the possibility for that to ensue between Egypt and Ethiopia.15

On the other hand, my interview with Mr. Rashad brought up the idea that a diplomatic

resolution is not possible when Ethiopia’s GERD directly impacts the livelihood of millions

of Egyptian citizens.18 According to Al Jazeera, GERD would reduce the supply of water

from the Nile to Egypt by 11 to 19 billion m3/yr, potentially leaving two million Egyptians

without income.19 Although I empathize with Mr. Rashad, his aforementioned claim ignores

the Ethiopian perspective regarding the beneficial impact of GERD on millions of

Ethiopians. GERD will lead to a 200% increase in electricity availability in Ethiopia, create



                                                                                            6
thousands of jobs, and have a substantial effect on the life prospects of Ethiopians who are

plagued by poverty.20 However, due to the inherent ambiguity present in this argument,

one is faced with deciding which nation faces the gravest consequences from the operation

or stoppage of GERD. Furthemore, such ambiguity is also present in certain international

instruments utilized to balance competing riparian positions. For instance, the Helsinki

Rules and Equitable Utilization Theory, which are “comprehensive codification[s] of

international river basin principles [where] each riparian state is entitled to a ‘reasonable

and equitable share’ of the international watercourse.”21 What is considered ‘reasonable and

equitable’ is heavily dependant on relevant factors such as “geography, past and present

utilization, economic and social needs.”21 However, such diplomatic tactics can be deemed

as ineffective due to the inherent ambiguities present. Who decides which factors carry

greater significance against another? Egypt may see that it’s ‘historical rights’ to the Nile

as carrying greater significance compared to Ethiopia’s need to provide stable electricity to

a majority of its citizens. All in all, my interviews with Mr. Elsaadany and Mr. Rashad

helped me comprehend some of the reasons behind why Egypt is hostile towards GERD: 1)

the potential for violence and 2) the negative impact on the livelihood of millions of

Egyptian citizens. Furthermore, the lack of perspective that Mr. Rashad presented during

our interview has revealed that one major source of political nonconcurrence is the

ambiguity associated with the diplomatic tactics being utilized.



                                                                                           7
       From my aforementioned interviews, there is a general consensus regarding the

ineffectiveness of diplomatic tactics in resolving this political issue. This left me wondering

what other peaceful alternatives are left? Although quite biased towards the Ethiopian

school of thought, my interview with Mr. Abiy gave me further insight into such diplomatic

alternatives; he suggested that if Egypt was truly concerned about the impact that GERD

would have on the water flow that they receive, they should invest in desalination for

freshwater and come up with an Aquifer Storage Recovery scheme.22 As I felt that his

suggestions were only towards the Egyptians, I asked him if he had any other diplomatic

measures that would apply to both parties. He directed me towards the Rowland-Ostrom

Framework for Common Pool Resource Management, an approach that considers the

incentives, material capabilities of both countries and the cultural, social and political

complexity of the GERD.22

       To conclude, although limited by the lack of a non-riparian perspective, my

engagement in this political issue has made me aware of several reasons as to why diplomatic

tactics have not been efficacious in creating political concurrence between Ethiopia and

Egypt: 1) the fear caused by the potential for violence, 2) the negative impact on the

livelihoods of both countries’ citizens, 3) the lack of legal continuity, and 4) changes in the

balance of geopolitical powers in the region.




                                                                                             8
                                    References

1. World Health Organization. (2006). Meeting the MDG drinking water and sanitation
    target: the urban and rural challenge of the decade. Retrieved from
    http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmpfinal.pdf
2. Conca, K., Wu, F., Mei, C., 2006. Global regime formation or complex institution
    building? The principled content of international river agreements. International
    Studies Quarterly 50 (20), 263–285.
3. Hammond, Michael. “The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam and the Blue Nile:
    Implications for Transboundary Water Governance.” Global Water Forum, 12 Jan.
    2020, globalwaterforum.org/2013/02/18/the-grand-ethiopian-renaissance-dam-and-
    the-blue-nile-implications-for-transboundary-water-governance/.
4. Block, P. and K. Strzepek (2010), ‘Economic Analysis of Large-Scale Upstream River
    Basin Development on the Blue Nile in Ethiopia Considering Transient Conditions,
    Climate Variability, and Climate Change’, Journal of Water Resources Planning
    and Management, 136(2), pp. 156-166
5. Daniel Abebe, "Egypt, Ethiopia, and the Nile: The Economics of International Water
    Law" (University of Chicago Public Law & Legal Theory Working Paper No. 484,
    2014).
6. Abadir M. Ibrahim, The Nile Basin Cooperative Framework Agreement: The
    Beginning of the End of Egyptian Hydro-Political Hegemony, 18 MO. ENVTL. L. &
    POL’Y REV. 282, 287, n.13 (2011).
7. “The Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam: A Timeline.” Crisis Group, 17 June 2020,
    www.crisisgroup.org/africa/horn-africa/ethiopia/grand-ethiopian-renaissance-dam-
    timeline.
8. Business Insider (October 13, 2012). "STRATFOR: Egypt Is Prepared To Bomb All
    Of Ethiopia's Nile Dams." By Kelly M. B. & Johnson, R. Retrieved 11 Dec. 2016.
    http://www.businessinsider.com/hacked- stratfor-emails-egypt-could-take-military-
    action-to- protect-its-stake-in-the-nile-2012-10.
9. Worku, Abenezer. Zoom Interview. Oct 2, 2020
10. “Overview      -     The     World       Bank     In Ethiopia.”    World      Bank,
    www.worldbank.org/en/country/ethiopia/overview.
11. Rahman, Majeed A. “Water Security: Ethiopia–Egypt Transboundary Challenges
    over the Nile River Basin.” Journal of Asian and African Studies, vol. 48, no. 1, 13
    July 2012, pp. 35–46., doi:10.1177/0021909612438517.
12. Tesfaye, Berhanu. Zoom Interview. Sept 29, 2020




                                                                                      9
13. Ferede, Wuhibegezer, and Sheferawu Abebe. “The Efficacy of Water Treaties in the
    Eastern Nile Basin .” Africa Spectrum, 5 Nov. 2013, journals.sub.uni-
    hamburg.de/giga/afsp/article/viewFile/714/714-739-1-PB.pdf.
14. Tawfik , Rawia. “The Declaration of Principles on Ethiopia's Renaissance Dam: A
    Breakthrough or Another Unfair Deal?” Deutsches Institut Für Entwicklungspolitik,
    German Development Institute, 25 Mar. 2015, www.die-gdi.de/die-aktuelle-
    kolumne/article/the-declaration-of-principles-on-ethiopias-renaissance-dam-a-
    breakthrough-or-another-unfair-deal/.
15. Elsaadany, Berhanu. Zoom Interview. Oct 5, 2020
16. Fred H. Lawson (2017): Egypt versus Ethiopia: The Conflict over the Nile
    Metastasizes, The International Spectator, DOI: 10.1080/03932729.2017.1333272
17. Coleman, Aconerly. “Water Scarcity and Conflict at the Ethiopia-Kenya Border.”
    The           Sojourner          Project,           10           June         2011,
    thesojournerproject.wordpress.com/2011/06/10/water-scarcity-and-conflict-at-the-
    ethiopia-kenya-border/.
18. Rashad, Mustafa. Zoom Interview. Oct 1, 2020
19. Al Jazeera (30 May 2013). "Death on the Nile". Retrieved 11 December
    2016.http://www.aljazeera.      com/programmes/insidestory/2013/05/2013530816
    23734349.html.
20. Yihdego, Yohannes, et al. “Nile River’s Basin Dispute: Perspectives of the Grand
    Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD).” Global Journal of HUMAN-SOCIAL
    SCIENCE, vol. 17, no. 2, 2017.
21. Kristin Wiebe, The Nile River: Potential for Conflict and Cooperation in the Face
    of Water Degradation, 41 Nat. Resources J. 731 (2001).
22. Abiy, Zelalem. Zoom Interview. Oct 8, 2020




                                                                                    10
