Mathematics Analysis and Approaches HL
         Internal Assessment

      Application of the
    shortest path problem


          Number of pages: 12
Introduction
Some time ago I took a trip with Uber and during that trip I was wondering if they took

me for the shortest path. So, in this exploration my aim is to try to figure out if they

took me for the shortest route. The shortest path problem is a well-known problem in

maths, more precisely in Graph theory, which I will explain later. There are different

algorithms in this theory, but I chose to use the Dijkstra’s algorithm. Figure 1 is a

screenshot from the Uber site which shows the route they took me, that took 5.8km

according to their website.




 Figure 1 – Uber trip




                                                                                      1
     Graph Theory
     In 1736 Euler published the first paper about graph theory, even if at the time he did

     not call it graph theory, this paper was the beginning of a new field in mathematics. At

     that time there was a problem that divided mathematicians, the Königsberg bridge

     problem. This problem asks if it was possible to cross the seven bridges of Königsberg

     (at that time Germany but now is part of Russia) which pass over the river Preger in a

     single trip. But there are two conditions, the first one you cannot pass two times the

     same bridge. And the second that you must end in the same point which you began.

     In Figure 2 you have the image of the city at that time and its bridges.




                               Figure 2 - Königsberg bridges




     As I said that problem divided the mathematicians at that time with some arguing it

     was possible and others arguing otherwise. But in 1736 Euler proved that it was not

     possible in that paper, which set the beginning of graph theory.




Figure 2 - Leonard Euler’s Solution to the Konigsberg Bridge Problem | Mathematical Association of America. 2
     https://www.maa.org/press/periodicals/convergence/leonard-eulers-solution-to-the-konigsberg-bridge-
     problem. Accessed 24 Nov. 2020.
In this theory the term graph has a different connotation from the one we are used to

as data charts. In graph theory, graphs refer to a set of vertices and edges that connect

the vertices. There are different types of graphs. There are simples’ graphs where one

edge connects two vertices and there are no loops. There are also multigraphs where

two vertices are joint by more than one edge, which are the graphs that I am going to

use to solve my problem. Moreover, for my problem I will need to use weighted graphs

i.e., graphs where its edges have associated values to them. In this case the values

will represent the distance from each vertex to the other. In Figure 3 there is an

example of a weighted multigraph.




                            Figure 3 – Weighted multigraph




                                                                                       3
Shortest path problem and Dijkstra’s Algorithm
In graph theory there is a well-known problem called the shortest path problem, where

you want to find a path between two vertices such that the sum of the weights is

minimized.



Edsger Djikstra, a computer scientist in the 20 th century was of extreme help in the

field of graph theory. In 1956 he created an algorithm which could solve the shortest

path problem. This is a simple algorithm but very powerful to solve this problem.



Before applying the algorithm, we need to assume that we are only moving forward,

for example in Figure 4 we are going from a to h and therefore we will not count paths

moving backwards. Like if we move from a to b to c to d and then to e we will not check

back to b. In Figure 4 all values are expressed in meters.




                     Figure 4 – Simple graph




                                                                                     4
The idea of this theorem is to start at point a and visit the points that are connected to

it, in this case only b. Then visit the points connected to b, in this case c and e. After

that we will continue with the smallest known distance vertex and see the smallest

distances. And go on like this until we reach point j. It is easier to understand after

seeing how it applies to a specific problem, thus below it is shown how the algorithm

applies.



Starting in point a, we updated the table with a value of zero in the vertex a (our initial

point) and a value of “infinite” to the other vertexes, as it is the shortest cost until now

(Table 1).


           Vertex              Shortest distance from a (m)            Previous vertex
             a                               0
             b                              ∞
             c                              ∞
             d                              ∞
             e                              ∞
             f                              ∞
             g                              ∞
             h                              ∞

 Table 1




                                                                                          5
Then the closest point to a is point b, with a cost of 600m. Therefore we will update it

in our table by cutting the “infinite” in vertex b and switching it for the shortest value

known until now. Also we need to update the collum of previous vertex in row b to a.



        Vertex                Shortest distance from a (m)            Previous vertex
          a                                 0
           b                            ∞ ; 600                              a
           c                                ∞
           d                                ∞
           e                                ∞
           f                                ∞
           g                                ∞
           h                                ∞

 Table 2


After that we will start in vertex b and check again the shortest path. In this case we

have two options. We can go either to c or e. So we will sum the distance from a to b,

which is 600 to the individual distances.



                      𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑥 𝑐 = 600 + 110 = 710𝑚



                      𝐷𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑡𝑜 𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑡𝑒𝑥 𝑒 = 600 + 228 = 828𝑚



Now we have two vertices to update on our table, the vertex c and e. We will do the

same we did for vertex b, as it shown in Table 3.




                                                                                        6
           Vertex             Shortest distance from a (m)        Previous vertex
             a                              0
             b                          ∞ ; 600                          a
             c                          ∞ ; 710                          b
             d                             ∞
             e                          ∞ ; 828                          b
             f                             ∞
             g                             ∞
             h                             ∞

Table 3


Now the work will we have to do is the same. We must visit each vertex and write

down in the table the shortest distance known at the moment. In table 4 you can see

the final table when all vertices have been visited.



           Vertex               Shortest distance from a          Previous vertex
             a                              0
             b                          ∞ ; 600                          a
             c                          ∞ ; 710                          b
             d                       ∞ ; 900 ; 898                      c;e
             e                          ∞ ; 828                          b
             f                         ∞ ; 1059                          e
             g                         ∞ ; 1090                          d
             h                         ∞ ; 1237                          f

 Table 4



After all this work, we get that the shortest path from a to h goes by : a → b → e → f

→ h, and has a total cost of 1237 m.




                                                                                    7
Applying the theorem to my problem

After seeing that the Dijkstra’s theorem applies to a simpler problem, now we can

apply it to a more complex one. This algorithm is very helpful but it is very difficult to

do by hand when we have a problem with a lot of vertices, like my Uber trip. Therefore,

I will use a software that runs the Djikstra’s algorithm to help me solve the shortest

path for the Uber trip.



The first step to solve the problem is to draw a simpler version of the map. In this

version I will exclude some neighbourhoods, as we know without the need of a

calculation, that going in circles around a neighbourhood will take longer. In Figure 5

we have the image from google maps and in Figure 6 the simpler representation of

the map. Also, we will need to make the same assumption we did in the example, we

are only moving forward, we will not count paths moving backwards.




 Figure 5 - Map                                     Figure 6 – Representation of the map




                                                                                           8
The next step is to construct the graph. At each intersection between two or more

roads, we will set a vertex. And each line that connect two vertices will be a weighted

edge where the edges will have the distance associated. I chose to do two separate

figures to show the vertices and the edges. If they were only in one figure it would be

a mess, therefore in two different figure it is much easier to understand. In Figure 7

we have the representation with vertices. And in Figure 8 we have the representation

of the edges where all values are in meters.




          Figure 7 – Representation of the graph with the name of the vertices




                                                                                     9
     Figure 8 – Representation of the graph with weighted edges




In Figure 8, I got the values using a tool in google maps to measure distances. The

problem with this tool is that the values are only an approximation and the error can

be high, as I got the values by setting the initial and final point by the eye.



Now that we got the graphs we can put them in the algorithm to solve the shortest

path. I used an online programme created in JavaScript which runs the Dijkstra’s

algorithm.




                                                                                  10
After inserting all the vertexes and weighted edges, the result I got for the shortest

path is:



1 → 2 → 3 → 5 → 7 → 44 → 45 → 51 → 52 → 53 → 54 → 88 → 89 → 90 → 119 →

120 → 121 → 136 → 137 → 138 → 153 → 154 → 159 → 160 → 161 → 162 → 163 →

174



And the value for the total distance is 5345m. Figure 9 shows the shortest path.




           Figure 9 – Shortest path




                                                                                   11
Conclusion

The objective of this exploration was to find out if Uber took me for the shortest path

or not. Which we have seen that did not, Uber took me for a 455m longer trip. This

does not mean that Uber is cheating me. There are some other factors to consider.

The first one, we must not forget that the values I used in my calculations are a simple

approximation of the real values and have some error associated. Then Uber takes

more into account than only the shortest path. Like traffic lights and traffic.



Therefore, we can say that the shortest path is not the one Uber took me but this does

not mean that Uber is cheating me.




                                                                                     12
     Sources
Adobe. Photoshop.

Edsger Dijkstra | IEEE Computer Society. https://www.computer.org/profiles/edsger-dijkstra/.

     Accessed 26 Nov. 2020.

Graph Theory | Problems & Applications | Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/topic/graph-

     theory. Accessed 24 Nov. 2020.

Graph Theory - Introduction - Tutorialspoint.

     https://www.tutorialspoint.com/graph_theory/graph_theory_introduction.htm. Accessed 3

     Oct. 2020.

Joshi, Vaidehi. ‘A Gentle Introduction To Graph Theory’. Medium, 25 May 2017,

     https://medium.com/basecs/a-gentle-introduction-to-graph-theory-77969829ead8.

---. ‘Finding The Shortest Path, With A Little Help From Dijkstra’. Medium, 17 Oct. 2017,

     https://medium.com/basecs/finding-the-shortest-path-with-a-little-help-from-dijkstra-

     613149fbdc8e.

---. ‘From Theory To Practice: Representing Graphs’. Medium, 11 Sept. 2017,

     https://medium.com/basecs/from-theory-to-practice-representing-graphs-cfd782c5be38.

Leonard Euler’s Solution to the Konigsberg Bridge Problem | Mathematical Association of

     America. https://www.maa.org/press/periodicals/convergence/leonard-eulers-solution-to-

     the-konigsberg-bridge-problem. Accessed 24 Nov. 2020.

‘Mathematics | Graph Theory Basics - Set 1’. GeeksforGeeks, 4 Jan. 2018,

     https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/mathematics-graph-theory-basics-set-1/.

Online Dijkstra Solver in JavaScript. https://wjholden.com/dijkstra. Accessed 24 Nov. 2020.




                                                                                               13
Weisstein, Eric W. Königsberg Bridge Problem. Wolfram Research, Inc.,

    https://mathworld.wolfram.com/KoenigsbergBridgeProblem.html. Accessed 24 Nov. 2020.




                                                                                      14
