Proposing a new probabilistic approach in
modelling epidemics
IB Mathematics HL Internal Assessment
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                           Page | 1



Introduction

     This investigation aims to propose a new probabilistic approach in modelling epidemics. This
topic is of significance as though humanity continues to progress in terms of technology, the threat
of epidemics to our survival is still imminent. A recent example would be our inability to control the
outbreak of the Zika virus in South America.


    My interest in this topic grew after I played a game called Plague Inc. Plague Inc is a game in
which you can create different types of virus and adjust their properties, such as the virus’
probability of infection, lethality etc. The goal of the game is to kill the population of the world using
the virus you created. This, adding to the recent outbreak of the Zika virus, led me to researching
epidemic models. The SIR Model stood out as it was used before by the Hong Kong Department of
Health in predicting the SARS outbreak in Hong Kong in 2003, a time when all of us living in Hong
Kong lived in fear.

     However, I noticed that some of the underlying problems of the SIR Model, such as the number
of people infected would be exactly equal to the expected value of the number of people infected
resulting from a certain probability of infection. Thus this investigation would propose a new
probabilistic approach in modelling epidemics using numerical methods, inverse transform sampling
and the Monte-Carlo method via a spreadsheet software and graphs.


Background research


Epidemic Models
     An epidemic model is a mathematical model that predicts population-level epidemic dynamics
(Keeling 7). In other words, it predicts how different groups within a population reacts to the invasion
of an epidemic. The SIR Model is a type of simple epidemic model.


The SIR Model
     The SIR Model is used in epidemiology to compute the amount of susceptible, infected,
recovered people in a population (Johnson 1). In other words, the model divides the population into
three groups of people: the people that are susceptible to infection by the epidemic (𝑆), the people
infected by the epidemic (𝐼), and the people that recovered from the epidemic with immunity (𝑅).


     Five key assumptions are made in this model to simplify the calculations.


1.   A fixed number of population. The number of people within the population is constant. There
     are no net birth rates and death rates, as well as immigration to and emigration from the
     population.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                          Page | 2


2.   Immunity upon recovery. A person is immune from the epidemic upon recovery. In other words,
     if a person from the 𝐼 population has recovered, he or she would be put into the 𝑅
     population group. He or she would be immune to infection by the epidemic and thus unable to
     be classed as the 𝑆 population again.
3.   Constant probability of infection. There is a constant probability of infection, and the probability
     of infection of the epidemic would not change for people of different ages, genders, races etc.
4.   No inheritance of disease. There is no inheritance of the epidemic, which also means that
     immunity of the disease is not inheritable as well.
5.   Homogenous mixing. There is homogenous mixing of the population, meaning that all
     members of the population have an equal number of interactions with each other over time.


The Deterministic SIR Model
      In a Deterministic SIR Model, there is a fixed infection and recovery rate. In other words, the
number of people infected and recovered would be exactly equal to the expected number of people
to be infected and recovered. This leads to far more straightforward equations and exponentially
distributed infectious periods (Keeling 2). In this report, the accuracy and the realism of the
Deterministic SIR Model would be evaluated.


Inverse of the Cumulative Binomial Probability Distribution Function
       The binomial probability distribution function of a discrete random variable 𝑋 is as follows.

                      𝑃(𝑋 = 𝑥) = (𝑛𝑥)𝑝 𝑥 (1 − 𝑝)𝑛−𝑥 , 𝑥 = 0, 1, 2, … 𝑛 (Fabio 530)
Equation 1      The Binomial Probability Distribution Function


     (Refer to Equation 1) Where 𝑋 denotes the number of successes in 𝑛 trials such that the
probability of a success on any one trial is 𝑝, 0 ≤ 𝑝 ≤ 1 (Fabio 530). In other words, the binomial
probability distribution function provides the probability of 𝑥 number of successes in 𝑛 trials
given the value of 𝑥. Thus the inverse of this function would provide the value of 𝑥 given the
probability of 𝑥 number of successes in 𝑛 trials. In this report, the inverse of the cumulative
binomial probability distribution function would be used in Microsoft Excel to formulate a new
Probabilistic SIR Model.


Monte-Carlo Methods
     Monte-Carlo methods are methods which solve a problem by generating suitable random
numbers and observing that fraction of the numbers obeying some property or properties (“Monte-
Carlo Method”). The method is useful for obtaining numerical solutions to problems which are too
complicated to solve analytically (“Monte-Carlo Method”). In this report, Monte-Carlo Methods
would be used in Microsoft Excel to randomly generate samples from a uniform probability
distribution from 0 to 1 in the inverse of binomial probability distribution function to simulate the
random probability of one being infected by an epidemic.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                          Page | 3



Data Collection and Analysis

Equations of the Deterministic SIR Model
     The independent variable in SIR Models is the time step or the unit time, given by 𝑡. On the
other hand, there are 3 dependent variables that gives the number of people as a function of unit
time.


  Group       Dependent variables as functions of unit time                          Explanation
    𝑆                              𝑆(𝑡)                          Represents the number of people 𝑆 population group.
    𝐼                              𝐼(𝑡)                          Represents the number of people 𝐼 population group.
    𝑅                              𝑅(𝑡)                          Represents the number of people 𝑅 population group.
Table 1       The dependent variables in a SIR Model.


        Furthermore, there are other variables that are needed for the creation of a SIR Model.

  Variables                                                     Explanation
        𝑁        Total number of people in the whole population.
        𝛼        The average number of interactions between people in the population per capita per unit time.
        𝑖        Probability of (Rate of) infection of the epidemic.
        𝑟        Probability of (Rate of) recovery from the epidemic.
Table 2       Other Variables needed for the creation of the SIR Model.


    From the above we can create 3 differential equations that represent the rates of change of
each dependent variable in a Deterministic SIR Model (DSIRM).


                                             𝑑𝑆(𝑡)      𝑆(𝑡)   𝐼(𝑡)
                                                     = − 𝑁 × 𝑁 ×𝑖×𝑁×𝛼
                                              𝑑𝑡

Equation 2         The rate of change of the number of people in the 𝑆 population group over time in a DSIRM.


    (Refer to Equation 2) The probability that a person from the 𝑆 population group meeting a
person from the 𝐼 population group is 𝑆(𝑡)
                                         𝑁
                                             𝐼(𝑡)
                                           × . The probability that the interaction between the
                                              𝑁
𝑆 and 𝐼 person is infectious is 𝑖. The number of interactions per day in the population is (𝑁 × 𝛼).
Thus all of the variables multiplied results in the rate of change of the number of people in the 𝑆
population group over time. Note that a negative sign is put in front of the equation as the number
of people in the 𝑆 population group decreases over time as people are infected.


                                     𝑑𝐼(𝑡)      𝑆(𝑡)   𝐼(𝑡)
                                             = 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝑖 × 𝑁 × 𝛼 − 𝐼(𝑡) × 𝑟
                                      𝑑𝑡

Equation 3         The rate of change of the number of people in the 𝐼 population group over time in a DSIRM.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                    Page | 4


    (Refer to Equation 3) Contrary to the previous equation, the first part of the equation is the
negative of 𝑑𝑆(𝑡)
             𝑑𝑡
                 , as the rate of decrease of the number of people being infected in the 𝑆 population
group over time is the negative of the rate of increase of the number of people in the 𝐼 population
group over time. However, as the people in in the 𝐼 population group recover, the number of
people in the 𝐼 population group decreases. The rate at which the number of people in the 𝐼
population group decreasing over time can be given by −𝐼(𝑡) × 𝑟, thus forming the second part of
the equation.


                                                𝑑𝑅(𝑡)
                                                        = 𝐼(𝑡) × 𝑟
                                                 𝑑𝑡

Equation 4        The rate of change of the number of people in the 𝑅 population group over time in a DSIRM.


     (Refer to Equation 4) The number of people that recover over time is equal to the number of
people in the 𝐼 population multiplied by the probability of recovery from the epidemic, which is
the negative of the second part of the previous equation.

    The DSIRM that will be created in this report will simulate the situation when a hypothetical
non-lethal epidemic is introduced into a school of 1200 students. The students in the school are
assumed to have 40 interactions with other students per unit time. The epidemic is assumed to have
a probability of infection 0.001 and a probability of recovery of 0.01. In other words, 𝑁 = 1200, 𝛼 =
40, 𝑖 = 0.001, 𝑟 = 0.01.


Euler’s Method
     Euler’s Method is a numerical method used to find numerical approximations to the solution
of the differential equation 𝑑𝑦
                             𝑑𝑥
                                = 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) (Blythe 232).


      The fundamental approximation in Euler’s Method is as follows.


                                               𝑑𝑦                        ∆𝑦
                                               𝑑𝑥
                                                  = 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) ≈ ∆𝑥

Equation 5        The fundamental approximation in Euler’s method.


      From equation 5, we can obtain the following (See Figure 1 for a graphical illustration).

If 𝑥0 increases by ℎ from 𝑥0 to 𝑥1 ,

                                                              ∆𝑦       𝑦1 −𝑦0
                                              𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑦0 ) ≈        =
                                                              ℎ        𝑥1 −𝑥0


                                              ℎ × 𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑦0 ) ≈ 𝑦1 − 𝑦0
                                              𝑦1 ≈ 𝑦0 + ℎ × 𝑓(𝑥0 , 𝑦0 )
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                                   Page | 5


                                                                                              In other words, the slope of
                                                                                        function at (𝑥0 , 𝑦0 ) is used to
                                                                                        approximate the position of (𝑥1 , 𝑦1 ) .
                                                                                        Clearly, Euler’s Method only gives an
                                                                                        approximate solution to an initial-value
                                                                                        problem (Blythe 233). However, as ℎ
                                                                                        decreases in value and as the number of
                                                                                        course corrections increase, the accuracy
                                                                                        of the approximation using Eurler’s
Figure 1     A graphical illustration of Euler’s method.                                Method would increase.
(Source: Blythe, Peter. Mathematics for the International Student:
International Baccalaureate Mathematics HL (options), InternationalIn a DSIRM, Eurler’s Method will be
Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. Adelaide Airport, S. Aust.: used to approximate how the number of
Haese & Harris Publications, 2005, p. 233)                   people in the 𝑆, 𝐼, and 𝑅 change over
                                                             time.

     The follwing equation can then be derived for the DSIRM.
                                                       𝑑𝑆(𝑡)                        𝑆     𝐼
                                  𝑆1 = 𝑆0 + ∆𝑡 ×               = 𝑆0 + ∆𝑡 × (− 0 × 0 × 𝑖 × 𝑁 × 𝛼)
                                                         𝑑𝑡                         𝑁      𝑁
                                                 𝑑𝐼(𝑡)                    𝑆0   𝐼0
                                𝐼1 = 𝐼0 + ∆𝑡 ×           = 𝐼0 + ∆𝑡 × ( ×            × 𝑖 × 𝑁 × 𝛼 − 𝐼0 × 𝑟)
                                                  𝑑𝑡                       𝑁   𝑁
                                                                 𝑑𝑅(𝑡)
                            {            𝑅1 = 𝑅0 + ∆𝑡 ×                  = 𝑅0 + ∆𝑡 × (𝐼0 × 𝑟)
                                                                  𝑑𝑡

Equation 6         Equation for the DSIRM.


     However, errors do still persist when numerical methods are used since they are numerical
approximations. The most prominent of which is the truncation error, which is the error caused by
using simple approximations to represent exact formulas (Ledder 2). Truncation errors persist as long
as exact calculations are not used. Thus truncation errors will always persist in DSIRMs as DSIRMs
cannot be solved analytically since we cannot obtain an exact analytical expression for the dynamics
of 𝑆 and 𝐼 through time (Keeling 5). Yet truncation error can be reduced by applying the same
approximation to a larger number of smaller intervals (Ledder 2). Therefore in this report, ∆𝑡 is set
to equal to 1 and the model is created for the time period from 𝑡 = 0 to 𝑡 = 1000.


Procedures of creating the Deterministic SIR Model in Microsoft Excel
    The spreadsheet software Microsoft Excel is used to create the DSIRM.




Figure 2     Microsoft Excel layout of creating the DSIRM.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                   Page | 6


                    The step-by-step procedures for creating this DSIRM are shown in Appendix 1.

                                   The Deterministic SIR Model generated by linear interpolation
                                                Total Population     S(t)      I(t)         R(t)

                        1400

                        1200

                        1000




     Number of People
                        800

                        600

                        400

                        200

                          0
                               0        200           400            600              800          1000    1200
                                                                   Time Step


Figure 3 The DSIRM generated (See a sample of the data in Appendix 2).


Graph Analysis
     From Figure 3, 𝑆(𝑡) decreases with time with an initially increasing and then decreasing rate.
𝐼(𝑡) increases and then decreases with time. 𝑅(𝑡) increases with time with an initially increasing
and then decreasing rate. The functions are expected to behave this way. The total population
remains constant, which fits the assumption that the epidemic introduced into the population is
non-lethal. When more and more people get infected initially, the number of people in the 𝑆
population group should decrease and the number of people in the 𝐼 population group should
increase. As the model progresses further over time, the infected people start to recover, thus the
number of people in the 𝐼 population group should decrease and the number of people in the 𝑅
population group should increase.


     The DSIRM generated in Figure 3 closely resembles other DSIRMs in other researches, meaning
that the model is accurately generated and its error is not large.


Evaluation of the Deterministic SIR Model
     Even though the DSIRM provided a rather thorough simulation of the introduction of the
epidemic into a closed population, there are two major underlying errors with the model.


1.                  It assumed that the number of people infected and recovered would be exactly equal to the
                    expected value of number of people being infected and recovered, which is not true, as in
                    reality there would still be an underlying random probability on whether the person would be
                    infected or not, or recovered or not.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                      Page | 7


2.   The DSIRM doesn’t account for the fact that it is impossible for a non-integer amount of people
     to be infected or recovered.


      Take 𝑡 = 1 as an example, the number of infected people increased from 3 to 3.0897, while
the number of recovered people increased from 0 to 0.0309. In reality, it is impossible for the
epidemic to infect an amount exactly according to the expected value of the probability, and it is
also impossible to infect 0.0897 persons with a disease or recover 0.0309 persons from a disease as
there exists only positive integer numbers of people.


     Even though one might argue that rounding off the numbers would make the model accurate
enough for the governments to use, it is not known whether rounding off the numbers would cause
Round-off errors in the model. Round-off error is caused by using a discrete number of significant
digits to represent real numbers (Ledder 2). This is another reason why the Probabilistic SIR Model
is worthwhile to investigate, as there will be no round-off error in it.

Formulation of the Probabilistic SIR Model
    To solve the underlying problems the DSIRM, the new SIR model has to have the following
properties.


1.   It is probabilistic. It takes into account that there would still be an underlying random
     probability on whether the person would be infected or not in an interaction between a
     member of the 𝑆 population and a member of the 𝐼 population.
2.   It only infects a positive integral number of people. The number of people in the 𝑆, 𝐼 and 𝑅
     population must be positive integers.


      The number of people being infected by the epidemic can be considered to follow a binomial
distribution, as the epidemic can be considered as performing “Bernoulli trials” on members of the
𝑆 population when they came into contact members of the 𝐼 population. The outcomes of this
situation are a certain member of the 𝑆 population either being “infected” or “not infected”, but
not both. The infections can also be assumed to be independent and the probability of infection is
assumed to be identical in each interaction between 𝑆 and 𝐼 individuals. Furthermore, the
number of interactions between 𝑆 and 𝐼 individuals per time period can be estimated based on
current 𝑆(𝑡) and 𝐼(𝑡) value and the interaction rate. Thus on these conditions, a new Probabilistic
SIR Model could be proposed.


     The new Probabilistic SIR Model (PSIRM) will utilize the inverse of the binomial distribution
function find the ∆𝑆, ∆𝐼 and ∆𝑅. Monte-Carlo Methods would be used to generate this PSIRM.
Microsoft Excel will be used to randomly generate samples from a uniform probability distribution
from 0 to 1 in the inverse of the cumulative binomial probability distribution function (ICBPDF) to
simulate the random probability of one being infected by an epidemic.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                              Page | 8


Equations of the Probabilistic SIR Model
     The ICBPDF is represented in this report as follows.


                                                 𝑠 = InvBi(𝑛, 𝑝, 𝑥)
Equation 7      The ICBPDF.


    (Refer to Equation 7) Where 𝑠 denotes the number of successes, 𝑛 denotes the number of
Bernoulli Trials conducted, 𝑝 denotes the probability of success in the Bernoulli Trials, and 𝑥
denotes the probability of a 𝑠 number of successes in 𝑛 Bernoulli Trials with a probability of
success of 𝑝.


     From the above equation, the equations for the dependent variable in a PSIRM can be
represented as follows.


                                                        𝑆(𝑡)   𝐼(𝑡)
                                  ∆𝑆 = −InvBi ( 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝛼, 𝑖, 𝑋)

Equation 8      The change of the number of people in the 𝑆 population group over time in a PSIRM.


     (Refer to Equation 8) Similar to Equation 2, the first part of the ICBPDF represents the number
of interactions between members of the 𝑆 population group and members of the 𝐼 population
group per unit time, i.e. the number of trials performed on members of the 𝑆 population group.
The probability of success of the infection is 𝑖. 𝑋 is a continuous random variable that is uniformly
distributed between 0 and 1, simulating the underlying random probability of a person being
infected by an epidemic. A negative sign is used here as the number of people in the 𝑆 population
group must decrease as people get infected.


                                          𝑆(𝑡)   𝐼(𝑡)
                        ∆𝐼 = InvBi ( 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝛼, 𝑖, 𝑋) − InvBi(𝐼(𝑡), 𝑟, 𝑌)

Equation 9      The change of the number of people in the 𝐼 population group over time in a PSIRM.


     (Refer to Equation 9) The first part of this equation is the negative of Equation 8, as the decrease
of the number of people in the 𝑆 population group should be equal to the negative of the increase
of the number of people in the 𝐼 population group. However, as the people in in the 𝐼 population
group recover, the number of people in the 𝐼 population group decreases. The number of trials
performed on the people in the 𝐼 population group is 𝐼(𝑡). The probability of success of the
recovery is 𝑟. 𝑌 is a continuous random variable that is uniformly distributed between 0 and 1,
simulating the underlying random probability of a person recovering from an epidemic, thus forming
the second part of the equation.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                                Page | 9


                                                               ∆𝑅 = InvBi(𝐼(𝑡), 𝑟, 𝑌)
Equation 10                       The change of the number of people in the 𝑅 population group over time in a PSIRM.


    (Refer to Equation 10) The number of people that recover over time is equal to the number of
people that leave the 𝐼 population due to recovery from the epidemic over time, which is the
negative of the second part of the previous equation.


      To allow a comparison between the DSIRM and the PSIRM, a virus with the same specifications
will be introduced into a population identical to that when used to construct the DSIRM previously
in this report.


Procedures of creating the Probabilistic SIR Model
    The spreadsheet software Microsoft Excel is used to create the PSIRM.




Figure 4                     Microsoft Excel layout of creating the PSIRM.


                  The step-by-step procedures for creating this PSIRM are shown in Appendix 3.

                                        The Probabilistic SIR Model generated by linear interpolation
                                                        Total Population       S(t)      I(t)         R(t)

                      1400

                      1200

                      1000




   Number of People
                      800

                      600

                      400

                      200

                        0
                              0              200              400              600              800          1000       1200
                                                                             Time Step


Figure 5 A sample of the PSIRM generated (See a sample of the data in Appendix 4).


                  However, since this SIR Model is probabilistic, it means that for almost every time this model is
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                            Page | 10


reproduced, the resulting model yielded would be different. This is illustrated in Figure 6, as the
same model as above is reproduced for 20 times.

                                 The Probabilistic SIR Model reproduced for 20 times
                                         Total Population       S(t)    I(t)         R(t)

                      1400

                      1200

                      1000




   Number of People
                      800

                      600

                      400

                      200

                        0
                             0   200           400              600            800          1000     1200
                                                            Time Step


Figure 6 The Probabilistic SIR Model reproduced for 20 times.


Graph Analysis
     (Refer to Figure 3 and Figure 4) As we can see, compared to the smooth lines the dependent
variables formed over time in the DSIRM, the dependent variables form rough lines over time in the
PSIRMs. It is due to the fact the outputs of the functions of time of the dependent variables in the
PSIRM are all discrete values. The total population remains constant, which fits the assumption that
the epidemic introduced into the population is non-lethal. In Figure 6, the areas formed the
functions of time of the dependent variables represents the trends of the dependent variables over
time. 𝑆(𝑡) decreases with time with an initially increasing and then decreasing rate. 𝐼(𝑡)
increases and then decreases with time. 𝑅(𝑡) increases with time with an initially increasing and
then decreasing rate.


Comparison between the DSIRM and the PSIRM
     By comparing Figure 3 with Figure 5 and Figure 6, we can compare the properties of the DSIRM
and the PSIRM.


     The major similarity of the DSIRM and the PSIRM is that overall, the yield similar outputs, i.e.
the shapes formed by the functions of time of the dependent variables of both models are similar,
as well as the number of people in the 𝑆, 𝐼, and 𝑅 population groups as 𝑡 approaches a really
large value. This implies that in a long term, the DSIRM can indeed give a rather accurate estimate
as to how an epidemic interacts in a population group, and thus justifies the use of the DSIRM in
predicting the long term trends of epidemics.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                        Page | 11


     However, a major difference between the DSIRM and the PSIRM are the short term results. For
example, 𝐼(𝑡) in Figure 3 has a much higher rate of increase initially compared to the rate of
increase of 𝐼(𝑡) in Figure 5. This implies that in a short term, the PSIRM can give a much better
estimate as to how an epidemic interacts in a population group, and thus the PSIRM should be used
in predicting the short term trends of epidemics instead of the DSIRM.


Evaluation of the Probabilistic SIR Model
     The advantages of using the PSIRM is that addresses the problem of the number of people
infected and recovering over time being exactly equal to the expected number of people being
infected or recovering over time, as well as the number of people in each population group not being
discrete, that seen in the DSIRM. It is also a more realistic representation of how an epidemic
interacts in a population in the short term.


      However, there are still some disadvantages to the PSIRM. One major disadvantage it is still not
an accurate estimation of how a disease interacts within a population. It still doesn’t resolve the core
assumptions in the model that would make the model inaccurate, such as a fixed number of
population, immunity upon recovery, constant probability of infection for everyone in the population
in different time periods etc.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                       Page | 12



Conclusion and Further Investigations

Conclusion
     This investigation aims to propose a new probabilistic approach in modelling epidemics. The
reason to propose a new model is that the Deterministic SIR Model has the problems of the number
of people infected and recovering over time being exactly equal to the expected number of people
being infected or recovering over time, as well as the number of people in each population group
not being discrete.


     A Probabilistic SIR Model is constructed using the Inverse of the Cumulative Binomial
Distribution Function. Monte-Carlo Methods is used in the Inverse of the Cumulative Binomial
Distribution Function to obtain samples from an interval of 0 to 1 to obtain the number of people
being infected and recovering over time.

    The resulting Probabilistic SIR Model addresses the problems mentioned above of the
Deterministic SIR Model, but still doesn’t resolve some of the assumptions of a SIR Model that would
make the model inaccurate, such as a fixed number of population, immunity upon recovery, constant
probability of infection for everyone in the population in different time periods etc.


     It can be observed that the Probabilistic SIR Model would yield results different from the
Deterministic SIR Model in a short term but similar results in a long term. This implies that in a long
term, the DSIRM can indeed give a rather accurate estimate as to how an epidemic interacts in a
population group, and thus justifies the use of the DSIRM in predicting the long term trends of
epidemics. But in a short term, the PSIRM can give a much better estimate as to how an epidemic
interacts in a population group, and thus the PSIRM should be used in predicting the short term
trends of epidemics instead of the DSIRM.


Further Investigations
     In Figure 6, we can see that there are areas at which the functions of time of the dependent
variables converge upon the reproduction of the SIR Model. This means that there is a high
probability for the functions of time of the dependent variables to be in that area. Thus finding the
probability distribution of the position of the functions in their respective area could be the subject
of further investigation, as it would give an area where the functions would probably be in a certain
period of time, which is more useful than an one-line estimate the DSIRM provides.


     Furthermore, a PSIRM can be developed for larger, city-scale communities, such as Hong Kong.
In order for such a model to be created, factors such as death rate of infection, natural death rate in
the society, virus changing nature over time due to demographics and seasons etc. The model
created can then be used as a basis to model real-life epidemics, such as the Zika Virus.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                      Page | 13



Bibliography

Blythe, Peter. Mathematics for the International Student: International Baccalaureate Mathematics
     HL (options), International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. Adelaide Airport, S. Aust.:
     Haese & Harris Publications, 2005. Print.


Buckle, Nigel, Fabio Cirrito, and Iain Dunbar. Mathematics Higher Level (core). Camberwell, Vic: IBID,
    2012. Print.


Johnson, Teri. "Mathematical Modeling of Diseases: Susceptible-Infected-Recovered (SIR)
    Model." Op12no2.me. N.p., 2009. Web. 7 Oct. 2016.


Keeling, Matthew James, and Pejman Rohani. Modeling Infectious Diseases in Humans and Animals.
     Princeton: Princeton UP, 2008. Print.

Ledder, Glenn. "Error in Eurler's Method." University of Nebraska-Lincoln, n.d. Web. 31 Dec. 2016.


Mackay, D. J. C. "Introduction to Monte-Calo Methods." Stat.duke.edu. Duke University, n.d. Web. 8
     Oct. 2016.


"Monte Carlo Method." Monte Carlo Method. Wolfram MathWorld, n.d. Web. 31 Dec. 2016.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                     Appendix 1



Appendix 1
Procedures of creating the Deterministic SIR Model in Microsoft Excel
    The spreadsheet software Microsoft Excel is used to create the DSIRM.




Figure 1   Microsoft Excel layout of creating the DSIRM.


      The procedures for creating this DSIRM is as follows.


1.    Enter the constants and their corresponding values in columns Q and R as shown in Figure 2.
2.    Enter the column headers as shown in boxes A1, B1, C1, D1, E1, G1, H1, I1, K1, L1 and M1 as
      shown in Figure 2.
3.    Assuming that the total number of students is 1200, in which 1197, 3 and 0 are initially (𝑡 = 0)
      susceptible, infected and recovered respectively, enter the respective values into Boxes A2, B2,
      C2, D2 and E2 as shown in Figure 2.
4.    Enter Equation 2 into Box G2 in Excel code (“=-C2/B2*D2/B2*$R$3*$R$2*B2”).
5.    Enter Equation 3 into Box H2 in Excel code (“=-G2-D2*$R$4”).
6.    Enter Equation 4 into Box I2 in Excel code (“=-G2-H2).
7.    Obtain ∆𝑆 for 𝑡 = 0 through multiplying 𝑑𝑆(𝑡) 𝑑𝑡
                                                        with Time step (∆𝑡) by entering “=G2*$R$5”
      into Box K2.
8.    Obtain ∆𝐼 for 𝑡 = 0 through multiplying 𝑑𝐼(𝑡)
                                               𝑑𝑡
                                                    with Time step (∆𝑡) by entering “=H2*$R$5”
      into Box L2.
9.    Obtain ∆𝑅 for 𝑡 = 0 through multiplying 𝑑𝑅(𝑡)
                                               𝑑𝑡
                                                    with Time step (∆𝑡) by entering “=I2*$R$5”
      into Box M2.
10.   For 𝑡 = 1, enter “1” into Box A3.
11.   To monitor the total population, enter “=C2+D2+E2” into Box B2.
12.   To see the value of 𝑆(𝑡) at 𝑡 = 1, enter “=C2+K2” into Box C3.
13.   To see the value of 𝐼(𝑡) at 𝑡 = 1, enter “=D2+L2” into Box D3.
14.   To see the value of 𝑅(𝑡) at 𝑡 = 1, enter “=E2+M2” into Box E3.
15.   Highlight Boxes horizontally from Box G2 to Box M2 and drag it down to Row 3.
16.   Highlight Boxes horizontally from Box A3 to Box M3 and drag it down to Row 1000.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                    Appendix 2



Appendix 2
Sample of the data in the Deterministic SIR Model
   The following is a sample of the Microsoft Excel data that forms the DSIRM in Figure 2 of this paper.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                     Appendix 3



Appendix 3
Procedures of creating the Probabilistic SIR Model
    The spreadsheet software Microsoft Excel is used to create the PSIRM.




Figure 1   Microsoft Excel layout of creating the PSIRM.


      The procedures for creating this PSIRM is as follows.


1.    Enter the constants and their corresponding values in columns M and N as shown in Figure 4.
2.    Enter the column headers as shown in boxes A1, B1, C1, D1, E1, G1, H1 and I1 as shown in
      Figure 4.
3.    Assuming that the total number of students is 1200, in which 1197, 3 and 0 are initially (𝑡 = 0)
      susceptible, infected and recovered respectively, enter the respective values into Boxes A2, B2,
      C2, D2 and E2 as shown in Figure 4.
4.    Obtain ∆𝑆 for 𝑡 = 0 by entering Equation 8 into Box G2 in Excel code (“=-
      BINOM.INV(ROUND(C2*D2/B2*$N$2,0), $N$3, RAND())”). Note that a “ROUND(number,
      num_digits)” function is needed for the first part of Equation 8, as a positive integral number
      of trials is needed for the ICBPDF. Monte-Carlo methods is used here as a “Rand()” function
      would give random values from 0 to 1, simulating the underlying random probability of a person
      being infected by an epidemic.
5.    Obtain ∆𝐼 for 𝑡 = 0 by entering Equation 9 into Box H2 in Excel code (“=-G2-BINOM.INV(D2,
      $N$4, RAND())”).
6.    Obtain ∆𝑅 for 𝑡 = 0by entering Equation 10 into Box I2 in Excel code (“=-G2-H2”).
7.    For 𝑡 = 1, enter “1” into Box A3.
8.    To monitor the total population, enter “=C2+D2+E2” into Box B2.
9.    To see the value of 𝑆(𝑡) at 𝑡 = 1, enter “=C2+K2” into Box C3.
10.   To see the value of 𝐼(𝑡) at 𝑡 = 1, enter “=D2+L2” into Box D3.
11.   To see the value of 𝑅(𝑡) at 𝑡 = 1, enter “=E2+M2” into Box E3.
12.   Highlight Boxes horizontally from Box G2 to Box I2 and drag it down to Row 3.
13.   Highlight Boxes horizontally from Box A3 to Box I3 and drag it down to Row 1000.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                    Appendix 4



Appendix 4
Sample of the data in the Probabilistic SIR Model
   The following is a sample of the Microsoft Excel data that forms the PSIRM in Figure 3 of this paper.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                         Appendix 5



Appendix 5

Summary of the Equations, Tables and Figures
   The following is a summary of the Equations, Tables and Figures shown in the paper.


Equations
                      𝑃(𝑋 = 𝑥) = (𝑛𝑥)𝑝 𝑥 (1 − 𝑝)𝑛−𝑥 , 𝑥 = 0, 1, 2, … 𝑛 (Fabio 530)
Equation 1      The Binomial Probability Distribution Function


                                           𝑑𝑆(𝑡)              𝑆(𝑡)        𝐼(𝑡)
                                                   = − 𝑁 × 𝑁 ×𝑖×𝑁×𝛼
                                            𝑑𝑡

Equation 2      The rate of change of the number of people in the 𝑆 population group over time in a DSIRM.


                                   𝑑𝐼(𝑡)      𝑆(𝑡)          𝐼(𝑡)
                                           = 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝑖 × 𝑁 × 𝛼 − 𝐼(𝑡) × 𝑟
                                    𝑑𝑡

Equation 3      The rate of change of the number of people in the 𝐼 population group over time in a DSIRM.


                                                        𝑑𝑅(𝑡)
                                                                   = 𝐼(𝑡) × 𝑟
                                                            𝑑𝑡

Equation 4      The rate of change of the number of people in the 𝑅 population group over time in a DSIRM.


                                                       𝑑𝑦                          ∆𝑦
                                                          = 𝑓(𝑥, 𝑦) ≈ ∆𝑥
                                                       𝑑𝑥

Equation 5      The fundamental approximation in Euler’s method.


                                                      𝑑𝑆(𝑡)                             𝑆   𝐼
                               𝑆1 = 𝑆0 + ∆𝑡 ×                 = 𝑆0 + ∆𝑡 × (− 0 × 0 × 𝑖 × 𝑁 × 𝛼)
                                                       𝑑𝑡                               𝑁   𝑁
                                              𝑑𝐼(𝑡)                          𝑆0    𝐼0
                             𝐼1 = 𝐼0 + ∆𝑡 ×            = 𝐼0 + ∆𝑡 × ( ×                  × 𝑖 × 𝑁 × 𝛼 − 𝐼0 × 𝑟)
                                                 𝑑𝑡                          𝑁     𝑁
                                                                   𝑑𝑅(𝑡)
                         {            𝑅1 = 𝑅0 + ∆𝑡 ×                       = 𝑅0 + ∆𝑡 × (𝐼0 × 𝑟)
                                                                     𝑑𝑡

Equation 6      Equation for the DSIRM.


                                                       𝑠 = InvBi(𝑛, 𝑝, 𝑥)
Equation 7      The ICBPDF.


                                                                 𝑆(𝑡)       𝐼(𝑡)
                                    ∆𝑆 = −InvBi ( 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝑁 × 𝛼, 𝑖, 𝑋)

Equation 8      The change of the number of people in the 𝑆 population group over time in a PSIRM.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                         Appendix 5


                                             𝑆(𝑡)       𝐼(𝑡)
                           ∆𝐼 = InvBi (             ×          × 𝑁 × 𝛼, 𝑖, 𝑋) − InvBi(𝐼(𝑡), 𝑟, 𝑌)
                                              𝑁          𝑁

Equation 9         The change of the number of people in the 𝐼 population group over time in a PSIRM.


                                                    ∆𝑅 = InvBi(𝐼(𝑡), 𝑟, 𝑌)
Equation 10        The change of the number of people in the 𝑅 population group over time in a PSIRM.


Tables


  Group       Dependent variables as functions of unit time                               Explanation
    𝑆                                 𝑆(𝑡)                            Represents the number of people 𝑆 population group.
    𝐼                                 𝐼(𝑡)                            Represents the number of people 𝐼 population group.
    𝑅                              𝑅(𝑡)                               Represents the number of people 𝑅 population group.
Table 1       The dependent variables in a SIR Model.


  Variables                                                          Explanation
        𝑁        Total number of people in the whole population.
        𝛼        The average number of interactions between people in the population per capita per unit time.
        𝑖        Probability of (Rate of) infection of the epidemic.
        𝑟        Probability of (Rate of) recovery from the epidemic.
Table 2       Other Variables needed for the creation of the SIR Model.


Figures




                           Figure 1      A graphical illustration of Euler’s method.
                           (Source: Blythe, Peter. Mathematics for the International Student:
                           International Baccalaureate Mathematics HL (options), International
                           Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. Adelaide Airport, S. Aust.: Haese
                           & Harris Publications, 2005, p. 233)
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                             Appendix 5




Figure 2                     Microsoft Excel layout of creating the DSIRM.




                                       The Deterministic SIR Model generated by linear interpolation
                                                        Total Population       S(t)      I(t)         R(t)

                      1400

                      1200

                      1000




   Number of People
                      800

                      600

                      400

                      200

                        0
                              0              200              400              600              800          1000      1200
                                                                             Time Step


Figure 3 The DSIRM generated (See a sample of the data in Appendix 2).




Figure 4                     Microsoft Excel layout of creating the PSIRM.
IB Mathematics HL | Internal Assessment                                                                 Appendix 5



                                 The Probabilistic SIR Model generated by linear interpolation
                                              Total Population     S(t)      I(t)         R(t)

                      1400

                      1200

                      1000




   Number of People
                      800

                      600

                      400

                      200

                        0
                             0       200            400            600              800          1000      1200
                                                                 Time Step


Figure 5 A sample of the PSIRM generated (See a sample of the data in Appendix 4).



                                     The Probabilistic SIR Model reproduced for 20 times
                                              Total Population     S(t)      I(t)         R(t)

                      1400

                      1200

                      1000




   Number of People
                      800

                      600

                      400

                      200

                        0
                             0       200            400            600              800          1000      1200
                                                                 Time Step


Figure 6 The Probabilistic SIR Model reproduced for 20 times.
