     The effect of wing surface area on the
 horizontal displacement of a paper aeroplane.
                                Physics.
                            May 2020 Session.


1     Introduction
When I was small I would always construct small aeroplanes with my friends.
Some models worked better than others, and the most curious wing designs
actually worked, whilst others surprisingly did not. Now that I am older and
interested in studying aerospace engineering, I wanted to explore the impact
wing surface area has on the aeronautical performance of an aeroplane. In
order to keep everything as simple as possible, I decided to use a paper aero-
plane, and build my own miniature catapult to include aspects of mechanical
engineering.

1.1    Background Information
The flight of a paper aeroplane depends on four factors, lift, downforce, drag,
thrust [3]. The thrust is provided by the catapult in this experiment, and
drag occurs because air resistance exists. Downforce is simply the weight of
the aeroplane, while lift is generated due to air moving under the wings while
in flight [3]. Keeping everything else constant, the higher the surface area,
the higher the lift will be [1]. This is because of the direct proportionality
which can be expressed as:
                                    L=c·A
Where L is the lift generated, c is a constant, and A is the area of the wing
[1]. In an optimum scenario, this increase in lift will be proportionally greater
than the increase in drag [5]. The ratio between lift and drag is referred to as
the L/D ratio [5]. This is equivalent to the glide ratio in gliding aircraft, the
ratio of horizontal displacement to vertical displacement at constant speed
[5]. As such, when the L/D decreases, the horizontal displacement will also
increase.


                                       1
1.2     Research Question
How does the horizontal displacement (in m) of the paper aeroplane depend
on the surface area of its wings (234, 230, 228, 226, 224, 222 cm2 ±1.00 cm2 )
when it is launched from a catapult at a height of 179 ± 1cm?

1.3     Variables
1.3.1   Independent and Dependent Variables
As an independent variable, I was changing the surface area of the paper
aeroplane, with the following values: 234, 230, 228, 226, 224 and 222 cm2 ±
1.00 cm2 .
    As the dependent variable, I measured the horizontal displacement of the
paper aeroplane; how far it flew. This quantity is given in cm, and accurate
to 3 cm.

1.3.2   Control Variables
The temperature of the room was kept constant (25 ± 1 °C). The windows
and doors were closed whenever possible, such that no air of significantly
different temperature could enter or exit. This is because an increase in air
temperature decreases the air density reducing the lift [4], which ultimately
grounds the aeroplane faster.
    The catapult was kept constant, and the same rubber bands were used
throughout the experiment. The experiment is an example of projectile mo-
tion, and the aim was to find how the horizontal component (displacement)
changed when the vertical component was altered (lift due to surface area).
This means that launching the aeroplane at different initial velocities or with
different techniques also impacts the horizontal component, which is not fair
testing.
    The launch height was kept constant by placing the catapult at the same
height in each trial. If the catapult height was variable, the horizontal dis-
placement would vary, also resulting in unfair testing.
    The mass of the aeroplane was kept constant (2.0 g ± 0.1 g). Because the
launcher was always at the same height, the gravitational acceleration was
kept constant at approximately 9.81ms2 [6]. This means that a variation in
mass will cause a different magnitude downward/graviational force, resulting
in the net downward force being higher or lower.
    The measuring equiptment was also kept constant by using the same
tape for all trials. No tapes are identical and therefore give slightly deviating
measurements.

                                       2
1.4    Hypothesis
I hypothesise that the smaller the surface area of the wings, the smaller
the displacement. This is because a smaller surface area implies less lift
[1]. As the gravitational force remains constant, less lift results in a higher
magnitude downwards net force, grounding the aeroplane faster. Because
the displacement is measured at the point where the aeroplane first touches
down, a quicker decline will decrease its horizontal displacement.


2     Materials and Methodology
2.1    Setup




               Figure 1: Diagram showing experiment setup




         (a) Primed catapult on desk        (b) Stacked desk setup

               Figure 2: Pictures of setup used in experiment

                                       3
Figure 1 shows the overall setup of the experiment. Important here is the
height, which was 179±1 cm. Notice that the catapult markings on the table
are not visible in 2a due to the low quality quality of the picture. Observe
the markings on the floor for the origin of the tape in figure 2b. Not in the
picture is the heavy weight that fixed the tape origin to the right position.

2.2     Materials
   • ”Arrowhead” paper aeroplane, folded from blank, recycled A4 paper

   • High platform (such as tables safely stacked on top of eachother)

   • Paper aeroplane catapult, self built out of LEGO technic beams

   • Profissimo pack of 100 rubber bands

        – 2x ”green” rubber bands
        – 1x ”yellow” rubber band
        – 1x ”blue” rubber band

   • Chalk

   • Measuring tape, RSL Tools, 15 m, uncertainty unknown

   • Ruler and set square, both Herlitz, (16 cm, 14 cm respectively), uncer-
     tainty unknown

   • Balance, Kern Emb, ± 0.1 g, maximum 400 g.

   • Heavy object to hold tape origin in place, in this case an alternator

2.3     Method
2.3.1   Reducing the Surface Area
In order to reduce the surface area by a certain amount (a), it was required
of me to derive a formula to find the correct width at which I need to fold.
This width is the only unknown variable, and must be solved for.




                                     4
            Figure 3: Diagram of the left wing of the aeroplane

   In figure 3 the dotted line represents the line that needs to be folded to
reduce the surface area by a. θ is the angle between the line normal to the
height and the hypotenuse of the triangle. Therefore, in order to figure out
what value w needs to be, solve for the positive solution of the following
equation:

                         w2 tan(θ) + 2wh − 2a = 0
    Two key things are important here. Firstly, there are two wings on a
paper aeroplane, so the value of a must be equal to half of the total desired
surface area reduction. Secondly, it is recommended to solve this equation
graphically using a GDC.

2.4    Execution of Experiment
  1. Set up the experiment.

  2. Prime the catapult and place the aeroplane inside.

  3. Launch the catapult, and measure the horizontal displacement to the
     point of first touchdown. Write this down.

  4. Repeat steps 2 to 3 five more times, such that 6 trials can be achieved.

  5. Reduce surface area of the aeroplane by 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 cm2 and for each
     repeat steps 2 to 4.


                                     5
2.5    Example Calculations
This is an example calculation for calculating how to reduce the surface area
by 6.0 cm. Measuring the dimensions and angle of one of the wings yielded
the following results: a = 3, h = 4.2, θ = 67◦


      w tan(67◦ ) + (2 · 4.2 · w) − (2 · 3) = 0 → w1 ≈ −4.18, w2 ≈ 0.61

   Rejecting w1 as it is negative, the width would have to be ≈ 0.61 cm.

2.6    Environmental, Safety and Ethical Concerns
Environmental, safety and ethical concerns were incorporated into the plan-
ning of this experiment.
    The catapult was built out of LEGO and can be re-used after the ex-
periment. The paper from which the aeroplane was folded is recycled and
can be recycled again, in order to prevent demand for further deforestation.
Minimal paper was used to ensure a reduction of waste.
    The catapult launched the aeroplane down an empty corridor, ensuring
that nobody was in its flight path. The plane itself had minimal sharp edges,
with only one point being noticeably sharp. This poing did not pose a danger
as it faced the flight path, which was always clear during the experiment. It
was handled in a manner such that no paper cuts were possible. The rubber
bands of the catapult were tense, but not strong enough to significantly injure
its operator in the unlikely case of a malfunction. The table was firmly held
in place by a sturdy block of wood, such that it could not move, let alone
fall down and hurt anybody.
    No humans, animals or other living beings were hurt physically or emo-
tionally by this experiment.




                                      6
 Surface Area (cm2              Horizontal Displacement (± 3 cm)
 ± 1 cm2 )
                      Trial 1   Trial 2   Trial 3   Trial 4   Trial 5    Trial 6
 234                   244       296       317       270       280        294
 230                   239       250       262       252       240        253
 228                   239       298       297       290       296        277
 226                   285       250       286       270       286        272
 224                   317       329       301       323       283        291
 222                   319       338       315       350       298        247

  Table 1: Surface area of wings vs horizontal displacement of aeroplane




       Surface Area (cm2 ± Avg. Horiz. Displ. (± 3 cm)           St. Dev.
       1 cm2 )
       234                             284                         23*
       230                             249                          8
       228                             283                         20*
       226                             275                         13*
       224                             307                         17*
       222                             311                         33*

Table 2: Surface area vs. average horizontal displacement
* An extra digit was added to account for a larger standard deviation




                                     7
3     Results




    Figure 4: Surface area of wings vs horizontal displacement (enlarged)


3.1    Interpretation
The graph’s trendline shows a negative relationship between the surface area
and the displacement. As the surface area increases, the displacement de-
creases. There is a strong deviation from the trendline at 230 cm2 .
    Additionally, the point at 234 cm2 appears to be higher than expected.
Unfortunately the difference between it and the rest of the data points is
4 cm2 , rather than the usual 2 cm2 . This makes it very hard to estimate
what the data inbetween 230 and 234 cm2 could be. However, due to at least
one statistical difference between these, it could be that this point is also
statistically different. The larger difference exists due to the nature of the
paper aeroplane, 234 cm2 is the original surface area, and a removal of 1 cm2
per wing is not possible factoring in inaccuracies.

3.2    Statistics
Running a Student t-test on the data using mode 1 and type 2 yields results
mapped to figure 5. Moreover, result groups are shown in red in figure 4.
The headers in bold show the independent variables that were compared, the
numbers below the p-value of the dependent variables. A p-value of ≤ 0.05
indicates there is no significant difference between the values.



                                      8
                    Figure 5: Student’s t-test on the data

    This shows that whilst the points at 222 cm2 and 234 cm2 are not signif-
icantly different, there are significant differences between points lying in this
rage. As an example, 226 cm2 and 228 cm2 are significantly different to each
other, as indicated by the different groups.


4     Evaluation
4.1    Conclusion
As the surface area of the aeroplane’s wings decreased, the displacement, for
the majority, increased. This does not hold true for some areas as there was
no statistically significant difference, due to the small range. This is presum-
ably due to a decrease in drag for the areas in between, the aeroplane being
more streamline in shape. This decrease in drag resulted in a greater net force
in the direction of travel. Concurrently, the lower surface area decreased the
lift, increasing the net downward force. Due to the increase in net thrust be-
ing larger than the increase in net downforce, the aeroplane travelled further
horizontally. This occurred to the point where the plane displaced the most,
but towards the end of the trials the lack of surface area caused a decrease in
displacement. Referring to the background research, it appears that the L/D
or glide ratio decreased, rather than the expected increase. This is unusual
for gliders that have their wing surface area increased.

4.2    Evaluating the Hypothesis
The hypothesis does not hold true. I had hypothesised that as the surface
area decreases, the displacement decreases. In the experiment, there was a


                                       9
significant increase, followed by a decrease insignificant to the initial value.
Nonetheless, at an unknown point, the lack of surface area and thus lift will
negatively impact the displacement. This was presumably just before the
last value.

4.3    Literature Comparison
As aforementioned, assuming that the L/D ratio decreased, the experiment
complies with the literature results: the plane’s horizontal displacement will
be decreased. Drag plays a role (as stated in 4.1), and experiments have
found that alternating the winglets of a paper aeroplane influences its drag
[3]. It is also mentioned that drag increases with the surface area [2], which
corrolates with my data.

4.4    Strengths
The main strength was the constant mass throughout the experiment. Be-
cause the wings were folded rather than cut off, the mass remained constant.
This ensured that the weight was constant, allowing the horizontal displace-
ment to be tested fairly. Moreover, the plane itself was also kept constant,
such that all aerodynamic properties were the same throughout all the trials.
   The launching of the plane was a strength, as every launch executed the
same. The catapult’s location was marked on the table, so that in the case it
got moved it could be put back into the correct position. The same rubber
bands were used throughout the experiment, so the force delivered to push
the plane did not differ. On top of that, the angle of attack (the angle
between the plane and the horizontal) was also kept constant.

4.5    Limitations
Primarily the limitation is the small range of the independent variable. The
range is too small to draw any definite conclusions and to characterize the
behaviour of paper aeroplanes when the wing surface area is changed. The
first and last values for the independent variable are not statistically signifi-
cant, as such an extension of range would be required to see if there are any
changes in behaviour beyond the current range.
    Measuring the point of first impact precisely was difficult, and a small
bit of estimation was involved (± 3 cm). This of course increased the error
margin significantly. To combat this, a sandpit can be used, where the point
of first impact is clearly visible.


                                       10
    The aeroplane’s path was also often not normal to the table where it was
launched. This did not impact measurement, but the factor that made the
aeroplane turn, such as air currents, is something that should be in control.
This can be done by conducting the experiment in a room with tight seals
so no outside draft could come in.
    The rubber band may have loosened slightly during trials. This then
impacts the initial velocity of when the plane starts gliding. To mitigate
this, regular testing with a Newton meter can be done (i.e. at a force of x N
the stretch should be y centimetres).
    An unknown weakness is what caused the deviation from the trend
line/random error for one of the points. Because the cause is unknown, it
is difficult to pinpoint improvements. As a general thought, ensuring that
the trials are conducted in the same manner and triple checking equiptment
alignment may contribute towards elminating this.

4.6    Extension
Firstly, it can be experimented as to how the horizontal displacement changes
when the angle of attack is changed. An example research question for this
could be: How does the horizontal displacement (in cm) of a paper aeroplane
depend on the angle of the aeroplane to the horizontal (0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°,
75°)?
     Secondly, the lift depends on the temperature of the air [4]. It could be
experimented as to how that has an effect on the horizontal displacement.
An example research question for this could be: How does the horizontal
displacement (in cm) of a paper aeroplane depend on the temperature of the
air (10°, 15°, 20°, 25°, 30°, 35°)?
     Thirdly, it would be interesting to find the point where the increased
streamline due to reduced surface area no longer compensates for the lack of
lift. This would be the vertex of the surface area to displacement graph.




                                      11
References
[1] 2019. url: https://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/K-12/airplane/size.
    html.
[2] Aerodynamic Drag. 2019. url: https://physics.info/drag/.
[3] Science Buddies. Soaring Science: Test Paper Planes with Different
    Drag. 2019. url: https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
    bring-science-home-paper-planes-drag/.
[4] Ethan Coffel and Radley Horton. How hot weather – and climate change
    – affect airline flights. 2019. url: http://theconversation.com/how-
    hot - weather - and - climate - change - affect - airline - flights -
    80795.
[5] Lift-to-Drag Ratio. Sept. 22, 2019. url: https://en.wikipedia.org/
    wiki/Lift-to-drag_ratio (visited on 10/17/2019).
[6] Ambler Thompson and Barry N. Taylor. Guide for the Use of the In-
    ternational System of Units (SI). National Institute of Standards and
    Technology Special Publication 811 (2008 Edition). National Institute of
    Standards and Technology / U.S. Department of Commerce, 2008.




                                    12
