Introduction
       During my journey from Paris on a TGV train, I was intrigued as to how and why the
train was able to brake silently. Through research, I was able to determine that this was
because of magnetic damping/braking. I became interested in exploring whether a larger
exposed area would have a stronger effect as opposed to a smaller area.

Magnetic damping is a form of drag that occurs when an electrical conductor travels past a
magnetic field. This process concerning a pendulum with a copper bob will see the bob’s
motion become dampened as it exits and enters the magnetic field produced by two magnets.
This document strives to compose and propose the correlation between the area of a copper
oscillator how that affects the rate of change of amplitudes of the oscillations. Thus, one
arrives at the following research question:

How does varying the area of a copper oscillator affect the rate of change of amplitude
due to magnetic damping?
                                       RQ clear and focused

Theory
       Lenz’s Law states that the induced current always flows in the direction that opposes
the change in magnetic flux.
The said motion induces an eddy current in the conductor as a magnetic field is present. As per
Lenz’s law the movement of electrons in the conductor instantly produce an opposing magnetic
field which results in the damping of the oscillation ultimately ‘slowing’ down the metal bob.
When the metal plate is completely inside the field thus at rest, there is no eddy current. When
the plate leaves the field on the right, it causes an eddy current in the clockwise direction that,
again, experiences a force to the left, further slowing the bobs motion.1 This produces a
exponentially damped harmonic which can be expressed with the following equation:

                                        𝑥 (t) = Ae−bt 𝑐𝑜𝑠(ω′ t + ø)                                         [1] 2
Where:
x is the displacement
t is the time of release
A is the amplitude
ω′ is the angular frequency of damped simple harmonic motion.
b is the damping coefficient
ø is the Angular frequency




1 https://courses.lumenlearn“Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping | Physics.” Lumenlearning.Com, 2020,

courses.lumenlearning.com/physics/chapter/23-4-eddy-currents-and-magnetic-damping/. Accessed 6 Mar. 2020
2 “Toppr.” Toppr-Guides, 27 Feb. 2018, www.toppr.com/guides/physics/oscillations/damped-simple-harmonic-motion/.

Accessed 6 Mar. 2020.


                                                                                                                    1
  This equation and information attained can then be applied in order to evaluate the
  following factors:
  The logarithmic decrement is defined as the natural log of the ratio of the amplitudes of any
  two successive peaks: (The logarithmic decrement represents the rate at which the amplitude
  of a damped harmonic decreases.3)
                                                          𝐴𝑖
                                              𝜑 = 𝑙𝑛 (        )                                [2] 4
                                                         𝐴𝑖+1
  Where:
  𝐴𝑖 is a peak amplitude
  𝐴𝑖+1 is the following peak amplitude

  The damping ratio is then found from the logarithmic decrement by: (The damping ratio is a
  measure that expresses the decay of oscillations)
                                                         𝜑
                                            𝜁=
                                                    √(2π)2 + φ 2                               [3] 5

  Where:
  𝜑 is the logarithmic decrement
  𝜁 is the damping ratio.
          The experiment consists of 8 different oscillator areas (and one control with no copper
  plate) that will be oscillating on a pivot. The displacement of the oscillator will be recorded
  using a camera. Then, video analysis will be used to extract data, that will be processed to find
  the peak amplitudes which are integral to the aforementioned equations.
Background info relevant to the following actions
  Design of Experiment
          The design below is the front and side view of the setup that was created for this
  investigation. How this apparatus is used and controlled is discussed in later sections.




                                                                                      2
                                                                                    Figure 1 ,
                                                                                    experiment
  4 Ibid                                                                            setup
  5 Ibid




                                                                                                       2
                                                                                          Figure 2,
                                                                                          Experiment setup



               The variables for the experiment can be seen in the table below:
               Table 1: Variables for explanation
                Independent variable                            Area of the copper oscillator
                How was it measured?                            With a ruler. Limit of reading?
                Dependent variable                              Rate of change of amplitude
                How was it measured?                            Video analysis. and then what?

               Table 2: Control Variables

                     Controlled                                                       How is it controlled
                                                 Why significant?
                      variable                                                             practically?
                The starting angle     To have a controlled experiment, the      To ensure that the oscillation
                of the pendulum is     angle from which the oscillator will      starts at a 90° angle, a small
          eV    perpendicular
                      ry nice, in      start oscillating is significant as the   marking is drawn. The
detailed and    every run.             initial position of the marked point      markings are made to match
rigorous                               would be different in each run            before the oscillator is
                                       therefore hindering the integrity of      released. The angle was
procedure to
ensure                                 the data collected. The initial           checked using a spirit level.
quality data                           deflection will also be my first data     As seen in Figure 2.
                                       point. (16 cm)
                Height used for the    Since I would be changing area, I         Engravings were made on
                oscillator of plate.   made sure that the height stayed the      the sheet of metal; this was
                                       same each time and I would only be        done to make the area
                                       cutting the width of 1.5 cm each time     cutting method more
                                       starting from the maximum width of        comfortable. It was made
                                       20 cm. The controlled height was          sure that the height stays
                                       5.2cm.                                    uniform.


                                                                                                                  3
Table 2: Experimental precautions
 Experimental                                                    How is it controlled
                       Why significant?
 precautions                                                     practically?
 The camera is the     Since the use of a camera has the         I set down a meter stick and
 same distance from    effect of a parallax error. To maintain   made sure that the camera
 the pendulum          consistency, the arrangement and          ‘stand’ was 0.73m away
 between takes.        location of the camera must be the        from the oscillating body
                       same throughout.                          using post-it notes to ensure
                                                                 the location of the phone
                                                                 holder is the same.
 The magnets do not In order to have a fair experiment the       Using a set square, I was
 move location or   separation between the magnets and           able to mark where the
 angle.             the copper oscillator must be the            wood frame should be
                    same, so that the magnetic field will        located. Also, the magnet
                    be uniform throughout all runs of the        holding slits are screwed
                    experiment. I made a mark of their           down into the wooden
                    location, so it would be very easy for       platform to ensure the
                    me to check if the location stayed           uniform separation between
                    consistent.                                  the two magnets.
 The same frame     If the frame rate differs in the videos,     The video is taken every
 rate will be used  then the integrity of the results will       time at 240 FPS, then it is
 for each run.      not be upheld. As when the data is           refactored using ffmpeg into
                    being collected through video                120FPS for acceleration of
                    analysis, the time intervals for each        the data collection process.
                    frame would be different.


 Same location for     The same height of the copper             A line is drawn onto the
 the clips that hold   oscillator should be exposed to the       sheet of copper to ensure
 the copper plate.     magnetic field. To experience the         that the ends of the pegs
                       same force/damping.                       have the same alignment for
                                                                 each run/area.

Area selection: The results had to vary enough to state and evaluate whether a correlation is
present between area and magnetic damping. This meant that the area that was used could not
be too large as then the results would not vary. Therefore, many trail runs were conducted to
determine the fit range of areas. I found that areas that exceeded 100cm2 would not oscillate
at all. The wooden base did not allow for plates that exceeded 80cm2.

Tracking point location: The tracking point location was selected, as the magnets would hide
the point if it were to be placed at the bottom of the oscillator.




                                                                                                 4
Table 3: Oscillator area table




The table above is of the areas of the oscillators that are used for the experiment. The height
is controlled at 5.2 ±0.05 cm.

The uncertainty for area was found using the following equation:

                                ((𝐻 + 0.05) × (𝑊 + 0.05)) − ((𝐻 − 0.05) × (𝑊 − 0.05))                              [4]
                   𝛥𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 =
                                                          2
    C: Correct data processing

Data Collection:
          First, due to the time constraints, the frame rate of the video had to be changed.
Therefore, each one of the videos was refactored from 240FPS to 120FPS. This was done
using a free command-based video and audio manipulating library called ffmpeg6. This
process was done using the following command:

ffmpeg -i ‘input file path’ -filter:v "setpts=PTS/2" ‘output file path’ 3


The videos were then analysed using the free program Tracker47. For each video, I set the
axis (0,0) at where the tracking point was at rest. This is because to graph the oscillation, the
displacement in x is needed. Then the boundaries of the video were set, where the starting
frame would be the frame that the body began to oscillate. Then the video had to be
calibrated to counteract the parallax that was caused by the camera. This was done with the
inbuilt filter called ‘perspective’. Then to allow the program to understand distances that are
represented in the video, the ‘calibration tape’ tool was used to set the calibrate distances
within the video. And the scale was set from the pivot point to the tracking point and was
measured as 16cm.
                               A: New software learnt




6 “Ffmpeg Documentation.” Ffmpeg.Org, 2020, ffmpeg.org/ffmpeg.html. Accessed 11 Feb. 2020.
7 “Tracker Video Analysis and Modeling Tool for Physics Education.” Physlets.Org, 2019, physlets.org/tracker/. Accessed

14 Feb. 2020.


                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                     Figure 3,
                                                                                                     Tracker
                                                                                                     software
Then for the tracking procedure another inbuilt feature was used to cut down on the vigorous
process of hand tracking. This feature is called ‘Auto tracker’ and as the name suggests this a
process where the software itself uses an image matching algorithm to scrub and track a
selected point. This was based on the concept of the user setting a template for a point, and
the software would find and plot a point that matches set template and then increments the
frames until the last point is plotted. As shown in Figure 4.




                                               Figure 4, Auto­tracking feature

This process was continued for all nine of the areas, and the following table is a snippet of the
output.
Table 4: Raw data sample table                                    You
                                                                  should have stated that the raw data is in the
                                                                  appendix.




                                                                                                 6
The graph below is the displacement placed against time for each one of the areas, the
damping in relation to the area used is clear as seen the varying time it takes for the systems
to become at rest.




                                                                                     Figure 5, graphed
                                                                                     data
The graph below the same visual as below however the two data sets shown are of the
undamped system and the smallest area, where the no matter how small still makes a
significant difference in the damping.




                                          Good consideration of non.magnetic damping that is used later to
                                          evaluate the impact of area



                                                                                     Figure 6,
                                                                                     Graphed data




                                                                                                  7
Data Processing:
        Due to the inherent implications of magnetic damping, the data attained will be used
to evaluate the aforementioned concepts that were discussed in the Theory section.
As suggested by the formula for Logarithmic Decrement (φ), in order to evaluate the
damping, the ratio of two successive peaks must be attained. This was done using MagicPlot8
software, due to its ease of use and simple extraction of selected data points.




                                                                                 Figure 7, Magic plot

These peaks were then noted down with their corresponding times which are needed for
further analysis.
Table 4: Sample processed data table (15.6 cm2):




                                                  consistent s.f.
 COnsistent d.p.
   •     The Time and coordinate of peaks were imported from MagicPlot.
   •     The ratio was then attained by dividing one peak coordinate by its successor.
   •     The relative uncertainty for the ratio was attained as such:
                                                  x + 𝛥x1     x − 𝛥x1                                   [5]
                                                 ( 1       )−( 1       )
                                                  x2 − 𝛥x2    x2 + 𝛥x2
                                        𝛥𝑅𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 =
                                                            2                  correct error processing
         Where:
         𝑥1 is the set peak, 𝑥2 is the following peak, and the equation represents the smallest
         minus the largest difference.

   •     The uncertainty for the Logarithmic Decrement was attained as such:
                                                 x + 𝛥x1          x − 𝛥x1
                                             𝑙𝑛 ( 1       ) − 𝑙𝑛 ( 1       )                            [6]
                                                 x2 − 𝛥x2         x2 + 𝛥x2
                                        𝛥𝜑 =
                                                            2
   •     The uncertainty for the damping factor was attained as such:
                                                              2𝛥𝜑
                                                   𝛥𝜁 = 𝜁 (       )                                     [7]
                                                               𝜑


       There is a variety of error calulations, all relevant to the techniques used.
         The remainder of the processed data can be found in the appendix.



                                                                                                              8
Analysis
The principal effect of damping is to reduce the amplitude of an oscillation, not to change its
frequency. So, the graph of the amplitude of a normal damped oscillation would look like the
following:




                                                                                                 Figure 8 : SHM damping decay

                                                                                            58


This means that a graph of all my peaks should too follow a pattern of an exponential curve,
this however is not the case. As when all the peaks are graphed for each area, they follow a
linear pattern as shown in Figure 9 rather than one of exponential decay shown in Figure 8.
This is due to the inherent systematic error that was prominent throughout the data collection
process which will be commented and explained further in the evaluation section.
This is a model based on statistical patterns of the data, but the explanation would require a
very complex mathematics since the magnetic field of the magnets is not uniform. (A
systematic error that is explored in the Evaluation).           Good critical thinking displayed




                                                                                                  Figure 9 Amplitudes over
                                                                                                  time graph

8 P. Onorato, and Anna De Ambrosis. “Magnetic Damping: Integrating Experimental and Theoretical Analysis.”

ResearchGate, 21 Dec. 2011, Accessed 5 Feb. 2020.


                                                                                                                  9
           This inherent issue with my experiment is that it does not allow me to evaluate the pattern
           using a conventional method, which was outlined in the theory section. This is due to the
           general linearity of my data, which instantaneously dismisses the processed data in Table 4,
           as the methods discussed apply to systems that stop oscillating exponentially. This meant that
           I had to find a way to explore the relationship in an unconventional method. Also, due to the
           nature of the data, It is impossible to evaluate the Q (Quality) factor, as the data does not
           meet the necesary requirements. Engineers use the Q factor to evaluate the dimensionless
           parameter that describes how underdamped an oscillator is, which can also be applied to
           magnetic damping.
Nice. Data does not follow theoretical pattern, so there is a new method to quantify the damping.
           The gradients for each of these are attained inorder to evaluate how each area affected the
           oscillation. I attained the error by establishing error bars then attaining the maximum,
           minimum and average gradients as shown by Figure 10 which is an example of a 64.2cm2
           area.
           This process was repeated for each one of the areas, as it will be needed for later evaluation
           of the errors in search of assessing the relationship between area and damping.(See appendix)




                                                                                   Figure 10, Amplitude graphing
           The graidnets attained are shown by table 5:                            example for which area is it?




             Again, another error analysis, this time for the graidents.



                                                                                                             10
  The ΔGradient was attained using the following equation:
                                                      𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑀𝐴𝑋 − 𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑀𝐼𝑁                                            [8]
                                        𝛥𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑 =
                                                              2
  This table allows us to then graph the different gradient with their accompanying error bars,
  As shown in figure 11. While we are not able to fit any one regression, the relationship is
  shown by the data points. We are able to see the relationship that the area has on the time it
  takes for an oscillating system to stop due to magnetic damping. Gradient is put against Area.
  It can be seen that with the larger areas the steeper the gradient is (As signified by the
  decreasing values). This means that the larger the area of the copper oscillator is, the faster it
  will come to a halt.




                                                                                                               Figure 11
                                                                                                               Gradient
                                                                                                               vs Area



  Conclusion:
         This internal assessment has successfully underlined and explored how the area of a
  copper oscillator affects the rate of damping experienced by an oscillating pendulum. It can
  be concluded that with a higher area that is exposed to a magnetic field, the stronger the
  damping effect will be. The applied magnetic field and the copper sheet produce eddy SOme explanation
  currents that are a force that opposes the motion of the bob. This is due to the internal
  resistance of the conductor, the said eddy currents will dissipate into heat, causing a removal
  of energy from the system. This dissipation of energy allows the magnet and conductor to
  form a damper that may be used to suppress the oscillation69.
  As with the larger area, more eddy currents can be induced across, meaning a larger force is
  created. Some of the damping is due to the friction of the pully. The experiment has a lot of
  sources of uncertainty.
D: To gain full marks, more interpretations of the last graph are expected.
          The experiment, however, was not perfect and therefore it did not yield data that
  follow the Logarithmic decrement requirements and thus yielding results that could not be
  used and evaluated using a standard method. This motivated me to propose an alternative and
  unique method to present and evaluate the relationship. The corresponding gradients of the

  9 Sodano, Henry, et al. Improved Eddy Current Damping Model for Transverse Vibrations. , Accessed 5 Feb. 2020.




                                                                                                                     11
amplitudes were graphed against area to determine whether a relationship exists. The graph
suggested that with the larger the area, more energy was dissipated, which brought the system
to a stop oscillating at a quicker pace. Thus, enforcing the presence of a relationship.

Evaluation:
Experimental issues and suggested improvements:
Inactive damping force:
        In an ideal linear damped oscillating system, the damping force is always "active" and
is proportional to velocity. That's not the case for this setup because the damping happens
when the plate is passing between the magnets at other times, when it is at the end of its
swing and far away from the magnets, the only damping is from friction. When the amplitude
of the swing gets smaller, the plate spends more of its time close to the magnets so the
effective amount of damping increases. Therefore, you would expect the initial rate of
damping to be small for the amplitude decreases, and the plate is affected more.
Non-uniformity of magnets:
        Another source of nonideality comes from the fact that the magnetic field produced
by a real magnet is not uniform, So the damping is strongest near the centre of the magnet
where the field is strongest. As shown by figure 12. The larger amount of lines means that in
the direct centre between of magnets, would result in a stronger effect.




                                                                                       Figure 12, Magnetic field
                                                                               710
                                                                                       lines
Further sources of nonideality:
       Mechanical friction of the pully caused the oscillator to dissipate energy. Another
source of nonideality would be the random error caused by the auto tracking software, as the
points would start deviating over time, if it was done manually it could potentially improve
accuracy.
Improvements:
A number of improvements can be made to fix the aforementioned errors:
   • Conduct trails to find a suitable starting angle to make sure oscillator is always
     affected by the magnetic field. Such as a smaller angle and a larger field area.
   • Rather than use displacement as a way of data collection, the use of the angle could
     more adhere to the equation for damping.
   • As most of the data collection was done using a computer algorithm, errors in plotting
     may have occurred. Thus, many runs of the data collection/analysis could be done
     and then the average of the runs would be used.
   • To reduce friction, a pully with lubricated bearings would be used.


10 “Magnetic Field Lines   | Brilliant Math & Science Wiki.” Brilliant.Org, 2020, brilliant.org/wiki/magnetic-field-lines/.
Accessed 6 Mar. 2020.


                                                                                                                              12
Bibliography:

https://courses.lumenlearn“Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping | Physics.” Lumenlearning.Com, 2020,
courses.lumenlearning.com/physics/chapter/23-4-eddy-currents-and-magnetic-damping/. Accessed 6 Mar. 2020


./Toppr.” Toppr-Guides, 27 Feb. 2018, www.toppr.com/guides/physics/oscillations/damped -simple-harmonic-motion“
.Accessed 6 Mar. 2020


.Ffmpeg Documentation.” Ffmpeg.Org, 2020, ffmpeg.org/ffmpeg.html. Accessed 11 Feb. 2020 “


“Tracker Video Analysis and Modeling Tool for Physics Education.” Physlets.Org, 2019, physlets.org/tracker/. Accesse d 14
.Feb. 2020


P. Onorato, and Anna De Ambrosis. “Magnetic Damping: Integrating Experimental and Theoretical Analysis.”
ResearchGate, 21 Dec. 2011, Accessed 5 Feb. 2020.


Sodano, Henry, et al. Improved Eddy Current Damping Model for Transverse Vibrations. , Accessed 5 Feb. 2020.


“Magnetic Field Lines | Brilliant Math & Science Wiki ./Brilliant.Org, 2020, brilliant.org/wiki/magnetic -field-lines ”.
.Accessed 6 Mar. 2020




                                                                                                                           13
Appendix
1 : Amplitude of areas graphed. (in cm2)

0




7.8cm




                                           14
15.6




23.4




       15
31.2




       39




46.8




            16
54.6




       17
62.4




       18
2:
0




7.8




      19
15.6




23.4




31.2




39




46.8




54.6




       20
62.4




       21
